<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>Conclusion: An Impossible Task, a Worthy Goal</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="p191"/>
<h1 class="sans">Conclusion:<br/> An Impossible Task, a Worthy Goal</h1>
<p class="left spaceabove2">I’ve given you an impossible task: to die with zero. You can follow every rule in this book, you can closely track your health and life expectancy, and you can recalculate your financials every day—yet you’re not going to hit exactly zero. When you take your last breath, you might still have a few dollars in your pocket, and maybe even hundreds more in the bank. So technically, you will have failed to die with zero. That’s inevitable—and it’s okay.</p>
<p class="follow">Why? Because that goal will have done its real job, of pushing you in the right direction: By aiming to die with zero, you will forever change your autopilot focus from earning and saving and maximizing your wealth to living the best life you possibly can. That’s why dying with zero is a worthy goal—with this goal in mind, you are sure to get more out of your life than you otherwise would have.</p>
<a id="p192"/>
<p class="follow">Millions of people go to church or temple every week trying to be like Jesus or Moses; millions more try to emulate Muhammad. Most don’t even come close. And that’s okay—none of us is perfect, and even the most virtuous among us aren’t always kind, always wise, always courageous. But by pursuing these ideals, we do move in the right direction—we become at least a little bit kinder, wiser, and more courageous. And so it is with the ideal of dying with zero: Try as you might, you will never hit the target exactly, but with any luck you will get closer than if you’d never tried. So go ahead—not only living your life to the fullest, but saving the only life you’ve got.</p>
<p class="follow">I hope my message has at least jarred you into rethinking the standard and conventional approaches to living one’s life—get a good job, work hard through endless hours, and then retire in your sixties or seventies and live out your days in your so-called golden years.</p>
<p class="follow">But I still ask you: Why wait until your health and life energy have begun to wane? Rather than just focusing on saving up for a big pot full of money that you will most likely not be able to spend in your lifetime, live your life to the fullest <em>now:</em> Chase memorable life experiences, give money to your kids when they can best use it, donate money to charity while you’re still alive. That’s the way to live life.</p>
<p class="follow">Remember: In the end, the business of life is the acquisition of memories.</p>
<p class="follow">So what are you waiting for?</p>
</body>
      </html>