<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>Appendix: What Is This New App You Keep Talking About?</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="p198"/><a id="p199"/>
<h1 class="sans">Appendix:<br/> What Is This New App You Keep Talking About?</h1>
<p class="left spaceabove2">The principles in this book are designed and presented to take you a long way toward getting more out of your money and your life. They give you some general guidelines on how to strike a healthy balance between present enjoyment and delayed gratification, between working for money (and investing it for future gains) and spending that money on the experiences that make for a rich, fulfilling life.</p>
<p class="follow">But maybe you want to go beyond following just the basic guidelines. To that end, I have some good news. The app that my team and I have developed aims to go a step further by taking those same principles and putting them in precise mathematical form. Earnings, expenditures, interest rates, experience points—all of these involve numbers and calculations. Optimizing across many possible combinations of such numbers—<a id="p200"/>as we must do to give you a plan for a maximally fulfilling life—requires far more calculations than anyone can perform in a reasonable amount of time. An app can do the necessary calculations faster and more accurately than even the most gifted accountant. And that’s exactly what our app does: It takes in all these numbers and does all the calculations necessary to help you plan for the most experience-rich life you can have.</p>
<p class="follow">The description you read here covers the most essential features—but in each future version we will add more complexity, to match real-world scenarios.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">What the App Does (and Doesn’t Do)</h2>
<p class="left ">As I explained earlier, my way of thinking about getting the most out of your life energy is to maximize the area under the fulfillment curve. But how do you maximize the area under that curve? It’s not at all obvious, because we face an ongoing trade-off between spending and earning. For example, suppose we spend a full year playing rather than working for money. Well, we can earn a lot of life experience points that way—but we incur a big cost, too. Specifically, we sacrifice all of that year’s financial earnings—as well as any bank interest or other investment returns that cash would have earned. All of that amounts to money that could be used for possibly even more experience points the following year. So the question is: Is it better to earn now and spend later? Or, more precisely: What is the right balance between earning and spending at any particular point in your life? That’s not an easy question to answer.</p>
<p class="follow">As a result, most of us don’t think about these trade-offs in <a id="p201"/>a conscious way: We tend to either wing it or just follow simple rules of thumb, like “save 10 percent of your income every year” and “retire at 65.” Or we wake up one day feeling burned out by too much work and too little play, and decide it’s about time we take a real vacation. Some of us plan more than others, but I don’t know anybody who plans out their entire life. For the most part, we go about these important decisions in a kind of willy-nilly way: earn a little money here, spend some there, save and invest some for next year or for retirement, and adjust our spending decisions as we go along from one year to the next. That’s understandable, given how overwhelming the problem can seem, and following simple rules of thumb is better than not planning at all. But in truth, such an approach is not maximizing our life experiences.</p>
<p class="follow">My goal with the app is to maximize my lifetime fulfillment and yours—which means getting you as close as humanly possible to the best set of financial decisions you can make throughout your life.</p>
<p class="follow">But I don’t want to exaggerate the app’s capabilities. The results from a piece of software are only as good as the data we give it. Yet the world is complex and full of uncertainty. So crucial inputs for the app, including your future health and the rate of return on your investments, are hard to predict. In truth, the app is just another tool, much like the other tools in this book. It’s a more precise and mathematical tool than, say, time buckets—yet it would be a serious mistake to confuse the app’s precision with total accuracy.</p>
<p class="follow">A better way of thinking about the app is as a simulation engine: a way to run what-if scenarios about your life. For example, what if your income grows while your investment returns remain flat? And what happens if your health declines at a faster <a id="p202"/>rate than most? By playing around with the app, you can explore what happens when you change this assumption or that one, and what effect tweaking this variable or that one has on your lifetime fulfillment score.</p>
<p class="follow">In other words, for each set of assumptions you want to consider, what is the optimal way for you to allocate your life energy to earning money versus acquiring experiences at different points in your life? The app can give you answers to this question under a variety of different possible scenarios.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">Where to Get the App</h2>
<p class="left ">As a reader of this book, you can get the app for free from the book’s Web site: <a href="http://DieWithZeroBook.com">DieWithZeroBook.com</a>.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">How to Use the App</h2>
<p class="left ">Using the app is relatively simple, because it will guide you every step of the way. It does this by asking you straightforward questions about those factors that go into determining your lifetime fulfillment score: questions about your current health, your free time, and your spending on life experiences. It also asks you about your income growth each year and the rate of return on your financial investments. These are the major variables that will help determine how much fulfillment you can glean from life. Along those lines, you will see why an app is so vitally important. It would be too exhausting, tedious, and time-consuming to do the calculations yourself, because you need to iterate through the fulfillment algorithm multiple times, once for every <a id="p203"/>year of your life—updating your health score each year and taking some of the output from one year and using it as input for the next year, then trying to accurately add up the fulfillment scores from all those years. The magic of the app is that it can do all these calculations for you, quickly and easily.</p>
<p class="follow">Realize, too, that there isn’t just one calculation to run. That’s because your overall fulfillment score depends on your inputs, and these can vary. With this app, you can try out different inputs to see the effect on your total.</p>
<p class="follow">Finally, you can even let the simulation engine run wild. The whole point of the app is to help you spend your life energy in the most efficient, experience-maximizing way, which also means minimizing the amount of time you spend working for money you’ll probably never get to enjoy. To figure out this optimal solution, you could play around with the app all day and still not find the best answer. So instead of trying out different scenarios yourself, you can put in some assumptions about the values of the variables you <em>cannot</em> control—and let the app run every possible simulation for you, then find the one with the highest fulfillment score and spit out the optimal values for the factors <em>within</em> your control that yielded that optimal result.</p>
<p class="follow">Everyone’s answers will be different, and you might be in for some surprises, but one fundamental principle remains the same: Under no optimal combination of decisions do you ever end up with any money left over. If you want to maximize fulfillment in your life, ideally you need to use up all your money by the end. That is, of course, the basic idea behind Die with Zero.</p>
</body>
      </html>