<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>Acknowledgments</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="p193"/>
<h1 class="backtitle sans">Acknowledgments</h1>
<p class="left spaceabove2">Everyone gets ideas: Often we have something we discuss ad nauseam, telling anyone who will listen, “I’m going to do <em>x</em>.” Over the years, though, the <em>x</em> becomes another item we stash in our procrastination bucket, something that never gets done without an inciting incident. For me, that inciting incident was a visit to my doctor, Chris Renna, whose urgent enthusiasm for my message finally propelled me into action.</p>
<p class="follow">Before I could dream of writing a book and allowing the world to critique and consider my ideas, I first had to discuss, debate, and refine these ideas with the toughest audience I could find: My most straight-shooting friends, family, and colleagues. Each lent a unique and interesting perspective and told me when they thought I was crazy. I want to acknowledge (in no particular order) Tia Sinclair, Greg Whalley, John Arnold, Cooper Richey, <a id="p194"/>Marc Horowitz, Omar Haneef, and Dan Bilzerian for taking the time to hear me blather and to put my ideas to the test.</p>
<p class="follow">Having well-thought-out ideas is one thing, but converting those ideas into a convincing, easy-to-read book is another. For that I would need to work with a writer who could take my words, stories, and explanations and shape them into a flowing, easy-to-read text while retaining my voice, style, and passion. That writer was Marina Krakovsky. I was really lucky to have a writer who was familiar with the relevant ideas from economics and who had the ability to support these ideas with relevant academic research. She also knew my agent as well as Kay-Yut Chen, a brilliant economist whom I went on to hire for work on this book. I want to thank Marina not only for all this, but also for pushing me through the long, unfamiliar, and sometimes painful process of turning a complex series of ideas into a book anyone can understand.</p>
<p class="follow">Once I had a professional writer and a set of good ideas and what seemed like a strong proposal, I needed a publisher to help the book reach the widest possible audience. To find such a publisher, I needed an agent in my corner. That person is Jim Levine. Although five agents said they would take me on as a client based on the initial pitch, I chose Jim because he was the only one who told me that the proposal, while good, wasn’t ready to show to publishers—and he explained clearly why he thought so. I want to thank Jim for his special interest in my work and his help in guiding me from being a guy with a book idea to a guy with an idea that’s ready for a book deal.</p>
<p class="follow">I want to thank Rick Wolff and all of the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt team for investing in me and in this book. I also want to thank Rick for editing a book that doesn’t fit easily into one <a id="p195"/>genre, and for helping us get the ideas across without coming across as too pushy or strident. (I’m pushy and strident.)</p>
<p class="follow">Thanks also to Will Palmer, a copy editor who went above and beyond the usual work of a copy editor.</p>
<p class="follow">I also want to thank people in my office who took the time to take a survey to give much-needed perspective and to help me get past my myopia about how people view this subject. In no particular order, my thanks for doing this go to Charles Denniston, Oleg Kostenko, Barrie Nichols, Shilpa Chunchu, Loftus Fitzwater, and Cassandra Krcmar.</p>
<p class="follow">To help convey ideas in a relatable way, there’s nothing like a story. In a book about how people should spend their money and their life, these stories are often highly personal, and I appreciate my friends, family, and acquaintances who let themselves be vulnerable by opening their lives to public scrutiny and criticism. So a big thanks to Erin Broadston Irvine, John Arnold, Baird Craft, Andy Schwartz, Jason Ruffo, Joe Farrell, Paulie “Pastrami” Simoniello, Christine Platania, Greg Whalley, Chris Riley, my sister Tia Sinclair, and my mom, Fruita Louise Diaz. A special thanks to Virginia Colin, who shared her story even though she did not know me. This book could not inspire or motivate anyone without your generous and courageous contributions.</p>
<p class="follow">Aside from relatable stories, I also needed a formal model—a mathematical representation—of the ideas I’m talking about. Behavioral economist Kay-Yut Chen was enormously helpful not only in working out the math behind the model but also in explaining the logic behind the results. Omar Haneef also played a key role in helping model these ideas.</p>
<p class="follow">The other data used in this book is publicly available, thanks <a id="p196"/>to research by the U.S. government, but presenting it in an easy-to-read format is an entirely different task. Charles Denniston created every single chart and picture in this book. Whenever we swapped out data sources or requested other changes, Charles always quickly turned around just what we needed.</p>
<p class="follow">For maintaining my schedule, coordinating meetings, making sure I made my phone calls, and generally managing chaos, I want to thank my assistant, Cassandra Krcmar. I appreciate her keeping the circus of my life manageable during this process with her usual grace.</p>
<p class="follow">Many people read parts of this book and gave me feedback—but asking someone to read an unedited book and provide feedback, especially negative comments, is a particularly grueling favor. It takes many hours of attentive work and entails the dreaded responsibility of telling someone you know when something isn’t good, or that it’s wrong, arrogant, or just plain sucks. If you like this book, it’s because of these hardworking, intrepid early readers. If you don’t like the book, you would have hated it more if it weren’t for Raquel Segal, Omar Haneef, Kay-Yut Chen, Keith Perkins, Marc Horowitz, and, most of all, Cooper Richey.</p>
<p class="follow">Cooper Richey actually deserves his own paragraph. If you think reading my unfinished book is a big favor, try reading it two and a half times! Try doing it while providing detailed page-by-page notes and criticisms. Try reading it and getting inspired to present more ideas, and then calling to discuss and debate some more. Try then getting recruited for additional suggestions. They say that no good deed goes unpunished, and I really punished Cooper. Seriously, he went above and beyond my original requests and provided more than significant contributions to make the book better than it was before. I’m extremely <a id="p197"/>grateful for the extra time and effort he put into making this book better.</p>
<p class="follow">I want to thank my godfather, Joseph Panepinto, Esq., for opening one door of opportunity that led to this crazy, wonderful adventure.</p>
<p class="follow">Everything we build is on the shoulders of prior generations, and I’d like to thank my mom and dad, Fruita Louise Diaz and Bill Perkins Jr.</p>
<p class="follow">Writing the book has been a blur, so if I missed anyone, I apologize, and I thank you.</p>
<p class="follow">I can’t count the number of hours spent just talking about the book or meeting about the book or thinking about the book, but clearly the result is that someone else was not getting my brain cycles during that time. My work is their sacrifice, and I couldn’t have done this work without the love and patience of my kids, Skye and Brisa, as well as that of my girlfriend, Lara Sebastian, as they tolerated and endured my mental absence far too many times. Thank you! I’m back!</p>
</body>
      </html>