<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>How to Spend Your Money (Without Actually Hitting Zero Before You Die)</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="p61"/>
<h1 class="CN">4</h1>
<h1 class="chaptertitle allcaps sans">How to Spend Your Money (Without Actually Hitting Zero Before You Die)</h1>
<h2 class="chaptersubtitle paired">Rule No. 4:</h2>
<h2 class="pairedtop notop sectionsubtitle">Use all available tools to help you die with zero.</h2>
<p class="left ">If you’re still with me, I assume you agree that trying to die with zero is a good idea, at least in principle. But you are probably skeptical about the feasibility of hitting this goal.</p>
<p class="follow">And you are right to be skeptical. In fact, dying with <em>exactly</em> zero is an impossible goal. To attain it would require knowing exactly when you’re going to die—but none of us is God, so we can’t know the day we’re going to die.</p>
<p class="follow">Still, just because we can’t predict the <em>exact</em> date doesn’t mean we can’t get close. Let me explain. Have you ever used a life expectancy calculator? Many insurance companies offer them for <a id="p62"/>free on their Web sites, and I think they’re kind of fun to try out. These calculators are, admittedly, imprecise tools, but in order to forecast how long you’ll live, they ask a series of questions about your current age, your gender, height, and weight (how good is your BMI?), smoking and drinking patterns, and other major predictors of overall health. Some also ask about your family history and whether you use a seat belt. After you’ve answered all the questions, the calculator typically gives you a number—you’ll live to be 94! (Or 55 if you don’t lose 90 pounds and quit drinking like a sailor and smoking a pack a day.)</p>
<p class="follow">Trying to figure out how long you’ll live might not be your idea of fun; it might feel like a morbid exercise, right up there with planning your funeral and listing your beneficiaries on a life insurance form. Fine. You don’t have to love it for it to be worth doing. If you don’t want to use a life expectancy calculator, that’s your choice—just don’t tell me you have no idea how long you’ll live, and then use that as an excuse to save money like you’re going to live to be 150.</p>
<p class="follow">Whatever number the calculator comes up with is just an estimate derived by actuaries, the experts hired by insurers to forecast risk based on relevant statistics. If the calculator gives you one number, you can think of it as just an educated guess based on the past life spans of people who are roughly like you. Many people who are like you died younger than this average, and many died older. So there’s an average and there’s also a range. To reflect this reality, some life expectancy calculators report their results in probabilities. They might tell you, for example, that you have a 50 percent chance of living to 92, a 10 percent chance of living to 100, and so on. These probabilities just go to show that predicting life expectancy for one individual is an inexact <a id="p63"/>science. But knowing only the probabilities of survival to a given age is still better than not knowing at all. If you don’t have any idea when you’ll die, you won’t be able to make decisions that are anywhere close to optimal. That means that if you’re the cautious type, you’ll just save and spend as if you expect to live to be 150; you might even act as if you expect to live forever, like those people who never dip into their principal and live only on the interest earned. As a result, you will die with much, much more than zero—which means you will have wasted many hours of your life energy earning money that you will never get to enjoy.</p>
<p class="follow">Knowing at least approximately when you’re going to die will help you make much better decisions about earning, saving, and spending. So I urge you: Go ahead and try a life expectancy calculator.</p>
<p class="follow">You might be wondering which particular calculator to use. I posed this question to the Society of Actuaries, since they’re the real experts. They wouldn’t endorse a certain calculator but instead referred me to their own Web site (<a href="http://soa.org">soa.org</a>), which mainly provides tools for professional actuaries. There is one very accessible tool their Web site recommends: the Actuaries Longevity Illustrator (<a href="http://www.longevityillustrator.org/">http://www.longevityillustrator.org/</a>). Based on your answers to just a few questions, it produces a chart that shows your probabilities of dying at different ages. Its point is to show you the risk of outliving your resources—but by looking at the extreme, you can see how low a probability there is that you will live past a certain age.</p>
<p class="follow">Another approach is to ask your insurance agent, and many insurance companies that sell life insurance offer free online calculators for anyone to use.</p>
<p class="follow">If you’d like to get a more precise estimate of your life expec<a id="p64"/>tancy based on additional health factors, you’ll need to answer more health and lifestyle questions. One helpful tool is the Living to 100 calculator (<a href="https://www.livingto100.com">https://www.livingto100.com</a>), designed by a doctor and researcher who studies exceptional longevity.</p>
<p class="follow">What did you discover after trying one or more of these tools? If you tried multiple calculators, how consistent were the results? Are you likely to die later than you’d thought? Are you thinking you might want to change your lifestyle, or see what happens if you rerun the calculation in a few years? All good questions, and thinking about them is a first step toward optimizing your spending.</p>
<p class="follow">But how? Given that we want to die with zero, and given that hitting exactly zero is impossible, how do you get close to zero? How do you deal with the variance of human life?</p>
<p class="follow">The first item to confront is the uncertainty. The possibility that you will live longer than you expect is called <em>longevity risk.</em> Nobody wants to die early—the possibility of that is called <em>mortality risk</em>—but nobody wants to die after their money runs out either. (With no money, your quality of life will take a dramatic dip, to put it mildly.) So there’s uncertainty on both sides of our expected life span, and we want to figure out how to deal with the negative financial consequences of that uncertainty.</p>
<p class="follow">For that, as noted, there are financial products. Now, I don’t really want to be pushing financial products, and I definitely don’t want to get into their minutiae (which I am no expert on), but there are some basic elements you really need to understand before you decide that dying with zero is not for you. And I don’t have to be a certified financial adviser to tell you what those basic elements are—any more than I need to be an auto mechanic to tell you that if you want to drive yourself across the country you’ll need a car.</p>
<a id="p65"/>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">You Are Not a Good Insurance Agent!</h2>
<p class="left ">You probably already know about the financial product used to deal with mortality risk, the risk of dying early. That’s life insurance, of course. Life insurance companies don’t know exactly when you’ll die, just as you don’t—but they can nonetheless pay your beneficiaries when you die, whenever that happens to be. The insurers can do that with great certainty, because they are simultaneously insuring millions of other people: Some of these insured will die earlier than average, but others will die later, so the “errors” on both sides will cancel each other out. That means an insurance company doesn’t need to know when you yourself will die—they just need to know enough life expectancy data about their total insurance pool to make sure they can pay out and still make a profit overall.</p>
<p class="follow">This ability to pool risk across a large number of people is what gives insurance companies their edge over you as an individual. It’s why people are willing to pay money to buy insurance of all kinds, instead of trying to protect themselves from risk on their own. <em>You are not a good insurance agent.</em></p>
<p class="follow">So that’s life insurance—it helps you deal with mortality risk, and 60 percent of Americans own at least some life insurance.<a id="px1748"/> What fewer people realize is that there are financial products designed to deal with longevity risk, too. Since many people are fearful of running out of money before they pass on, there is one product that they should definitely look into. These products are called <em>income</em> <em>annuities</em> (or simply <em>annuities</em>). Annuities are essentially the opposite of life insurance: When you buy life in<a id="p66"/>surance, you’re spending money to protect your survivors against the risk that you’ll die too young, whereas buying annuities protects you against the risk of dying too old (outliving your savings).</p>
<p class="follow">If you don’t want to hear it from me, listen to Ron Lieber, <em>The New York Times’</em> “Your Money” columnist. “The insurance companies that create annuities often make them seem like investments,” he wrote in a recent explainer about annuities. “But really they’re more like insurance.” Lieber went on: “Like insurance to stave off financial disaster, an annuity is something you purchase to guarantee that you won’t run out of money if you live a long time.”<a id="px1747"/></p>
<p class="follow">In fact, thinking of annuities as insurance makes them a lot more sensible than thinking of them as investments—because as investments they are not good at all. But that’s not their goal—their goal is to insure you against the risk of outliving your money.</p>
<p class="follow">How do they achieve that goal? Well, buying an annuity means you give the insurance company a lump sum—say, $500,000 at age 60—and in return you get a guaranteed monthly payout (for example, $2,400 each month) for the rest of your life, however long that happens to be. Like all insurance, annuities aren’t free—insurance companies have to make money to stay in business!—but if your goal is to maximize the life experiences you can buy with the money you’ve earned, they’re a very sensible solution. That’s partly because, even after the insurance company’s fees, your monthly payouts amount to more than you would probably be willing to pay yourself if you wanted to make sure you didn’t outlive your money. For example, one popular rule of thumb for retirement spending is the “4 percent rule,” <a id="p67"/>whereby you withdraw 4 percent from your savings each year of retirement. Well, with annuities, your annual payouts will probably amount to more than 4 percent of what you put into the annuity—and, unlike the 4 percent withdrawals, those payouts are guaranteed to continue for the rest of your life.</p>
<p class="follow">The reason the insurance company can give you a rate of return that is both steady and reasonably high is that you are not leaving any money on the table. You relinquish your principal forever. In the extreme case—if you die the day after you buy the annuity—you won’t see any more of the money you put in, and it will instead go to monthly payments to the lucky stranger (another annuity buyer) who lives into her nineties. Without an annuity, on the other hand, you are forced to self-insure—to be your own insurance agent. That’s not a great idea, because unlike the insurance agents who work for big insurance companies, you don’t have the ability to pool risk and cancel out errors on both sides. So, to feel financially secure until the end of your days, you will have to leave a large cushion to cover the worst-case scenario: You will have to oversave, which means that more likely than not you will end up dying with considerable money left over. You’ll have worked for years earning money that you never got to enjoy. So by trying to play insurance agent, you are not even close to maximizing your life. Again, this is why you are not a good insurance agent!</p>
<p class="follow">Economists generally think that annuities are such a rational way to deal with longevity risk that many experts have long wondered why more people don’t buy annuities—a question economists call “the annuity puzzle.”<a id="px1746"/></p>
<p class="follow">So am I telling you to go plunk down all your savings in an annuity? No, of course not. But what I am saying is that there <a id="p68"/>exist solutions to the problem of how to die with zero without running out of money, and you’d be doing yourself a disservice if you didn’t at least look into them.</p>
<p class="follow">Again, remember that the goal is to eliminate as much waste as possible. How close you get to that goal depends on your own risk tolerance. If you have a very low tolerance for risk—meaning you will not accept even a tiny chance of outliving your money—you will either buy an annuity or you will self-insure by leaving a huge cushion. The odds that you will live to be 123 are currently very low. (The oldest person on record died when she was 122 years and 164 days.) But if you are extremely risk averse, then you will leave a cushion big enough to last you through your 123rd year.</p>
<p class="follow">On the flip side, if you are comfortable living on the edge, you don’t need this book, because you are probably already on track to die with zero. Well, not really—you still need this book, because when you live perilously close to the edge, you risk outliving your money. In general, though, the higher your tolerance for longevity risk, the less of a cushion you will need. So the more risk you are willing to take, the less of your life energy you’re likely to waste working for money you won’t ever get to spend.</p>
<p class="follow">For example, suppose your life expectancy is 85, but you want to allow for an error of 5 to 6 percent. If so, you might decide to save for a few extra years—in this case, enough to last you until you’re 90. But if you don’t want to have wasted five years’ worth of savings in case you do die as expected at 85, you can eliminate that waste (and live a little better between now and then) by saving a little less—as long as you’re okay with the risk.</p>
<p class="follow">I am not telling you which way is right: Risk tolerance is a <a id="p69"/>singular and personal preference. But I do want you to know that there is a big difference between thinking about your risk tolerance and acting out of blind fear. So it’s fine to look at your life expectancy, to consider your risk tolerance, and to do the math to figure out how many years you need to save for. But that’s not the same as being so frightened of outliving your money—or of the thought of death—that you avoid even looking at the numbers. If you live your life with fear and avoidance, my bet is you will either fritter your money away or play it so safe that you will leave many, many years of your hard-earned money behind—so you’ll be working many years as a slave to your own fears.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">What Problem Are You Solving?</h2>
<p class="left ">A caution: Annuities can be very complicated—entire books have been written about them. For starters, there are several different types. Also, depending on a whole host of factors—such as your age and health, your total savings, and your tolerance for risk—you might be better off bypassing annuities completely or using a mix of retirement investments, of which annuities are just one.</p>
<p class="follow">Financial advisers can help you sort these things out—I don’t blame you for not wanting to read a book about annuities! But you can’t be totally ignorant. And you have to be clear about what you want the adviser to do. First you need to understand that some financial advisers don’t particularly want to bring up annuities: If your adviser gets paid a percentage of what financial professionals call your “assets under management,” their incen<a id="p70"/>tive is to accumulate assets under management. The last thing they want is for you to take all your money out of the portfolio they are managing for you. After all, for them, annuities are the competition.</p>
<p class="follow">But let’s assume you are working with a fee-only adviser, someone you pay a flat fee for giving you financial advice. This kind of adviser doesn’t have an incentive to avoid annuities and also doesn’t get paid commissions for selling annuities. Great—no conflicts of interest in either direction. Your adviser can do the mental gymnastics to come up with a plan for you. But you first have to tell them clearly what your goal is, what problem you are trying to solve. If you’ve got a roofing problem, don’t call the plumber. The best plumber in the world won’t fix your leaky roof. Likewise, your financial adviser might be a great stock picker, but that’s helpful only if the problem they are solving is for you to be as rich as possible—whereas we’re solving for your total life enjoyment.</p>
<p class="follow">Let me say that again: <em>We are solving for your total life enjoyment.</em></p>
<p class="follow">That is, the premise of this book is that you should be focusing on maximizing your life enjoyment rather than on maximizing your wealth. Those are two very different goals. Money is just a means to an end: Having money helps you to achieve the more important goal of enjoying your life. But trying to maximize money actually gets in the way of achieving the more important goal.</p>
<p class="follow">So always keep this end goal in mind. Make “maximize total life enjoyment” your mantra, using it to guide every decision—including what to focus on with your financial adviser. If you tell your fee-only financial adviser that you are trying to get as much <a id="p71"/>enjoyment out of your savings as possible without outliving your savings, they can help you create a plan for making that happen.</p>
<p class="follow">The part of that plan that I’ve been focusing on in this chapter is how to avoid running out of money—how not to outspend your savings. But of course that’s just one half of the question of how to die with zero; the other half is how not to waste your life energy by underspending. So what’s the plan for spending down your money so you don’t die with leftover assets and a pile of regrets? In the language of financial advisers, how should you plan to “decumulate” the money you’ve been accumulating over the years? My full answer to that question comes in chapter 8, “Know Your Peak,” but let me just give you a brief preview here. It starts with tracking your health so you know when to start spending more than you are earning (when to crack open your nest egg). It also means knowing your projected death date and your <em>annual cost of just staying alive,</em> because those two numbers together tell you the bare minimum amount you will need between now and the end of your life.</p>
<p class="follow">All your savings beyond that amount is money you must aggressively spend down on experiences that you enjoy. I say “aggressively” because your declining health and diminishing interests mean that your list of activities will narrow as you age, which means that your spending rate won’t remain constant: If you want to die with zero and make the most of whatever health you have at every point in your lifetime, you will need to spend more in your fifties than in your sixties, and more in your sixties than in your seventies, let alone your eighties and nineties! Chapter 8 further explains these ideas and gives you tools for implementing them, by yourself or with the help of a financial adviser.</p>
<a id="p72"/>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">Final Countdown</h2>
<p class="left ">Like all living creatures, humans have evolved to survive. Of course, we want to do more than just survive; for example, I’m sure if I asked you if you want to survive or really thrive, you’d choose thriving. But our biology is such that efforts to live the best life we can often don’t come as naturally or as strongly as the basic instinct to survive. Avoiding death is our number one priority, and that single goal dwarfs everything else. My friend Cooper Richey put it well when he said, “The human brain is wired to be irrational about death.” People avoid the subject of death, they behave as if it’s never coming, and too many don’t plan for it. It’s just some sort of mystery date in one’s future when we expire.</p>
<p class="follow">This kind of blanket denial explains why so many people are willing to spend tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars to prolong life for just a few more weeks. Think about it: That’s money that they spent years or decades working hard for. They gave up <em>years</em> of their life <em>while</em> <em>healthy and vibrant</em> to buy a few extra <em>weeks</em> of life when they are <em>sick and immobile.</em> If that’s not irrational, I don’t know what is!</p>
<p class="follow">Granted, money has absolutely no value to you when you’re dead—that’s why I say you should die with zero. Because of that, it’s not irrational once you’re near the end to spend all of your remaining money to prolong life even a little bit. At that point, it’s use-it-or-lose-it. As a trio of high-powered economists have written, “A substantial amount of spending on futile care is rational when there is no value of leaving wealth behind.”<a id="px1745"/></p>
<a id="p73"/>
<p class="follow">But that statement is true only if you failed to plan and are therefore now finding yourself trying to make the best of a bad situation. And why would you get into this bad situation? Not on purpose, that’s for sure. You would never get to that point if you thought rationally <em>ahead of time</em> and made plans when your health was good—because a <em>plan</em> to spend a huge portion of your wealth during the last few weeks of life makes no sense. It’s totally irrational.</p>
<p class="follow">But here’s the problem: People are irrational about death even when they are not close to death. That’s why they have outsize fears of running out of money before they die—big enough to compel many people to oversave for the distant future and, as a result, fail to enjoy their present as much as they could.</p>
<p class="follow">But death and deterioration are real for everyone, so the date of your death in the future <em>should</em> affect what your behavior is now. Think of it one step at a time, starting with the most extreme case: If you knew that you were going to die tomorrow, your behavior and activities today would obviously change, maybe even taking a 180-degree turn. Now take it down just a notch: If you were two days away from death, your behavior and activities would change a little differently, but they’d still be dramatically different than if you had 50 or 75 more years to live. Now think about how your behavior would change if you knew you had three days until your death. What if you had 365 days? Now imagine iterating through this loop until you get to 14,000 days or 25,000 days or whatever actual number of days you probably have. Note how this line of thinking extends to your actual death date and changes your plans.</p>
<p class="follow">Also notice that I’m <em>not</em> saying you should live today as if <a id="p74"/>it’s your last day. We always have to balance living in the present with planning for the future, and the balance tilts gradually as you shift your death date out: The closer your death date is, the more urgency you need to have, and the further away it is, the more you can and should plan for the future. But if we fail to look at our death date at all, we act as if we will live forever—and then there’s no way are we going to get the balance anywhere close to right.</p>
<p class="follow">At the same time, thinking about death can be distressing, so we tend to avoid thinking about it, and we behave as if it is never going to happen. We keep putting off wonderful experiences, as if in our final month we can easily squeeze in all those experiences that we had put off all our lives. Needless to say, that’s not possible—so it’s totally irrational.</p>
<p class="follow">I know it may sound morbid and it might make you uncomfortable, but I’ve actually started using an app called Final Countdown that counts down the days<a id="px1744"/> (and years, months, weeks, and so on) before my estimated death date, and I have been urging all my friends to do the same. Yes, I can see how this app could be unnerving, but the reminder of death gives a much-needed urgency to one’s life.</p>
<p class="follow">By seeing how many weeks I’ve got left, for example, I’m reminded how many (or how few) weekends I’ve got. Seeing the number of years reminds me that I’ve got only so many Christmases to enjoy, or so many summers or autumns. And those in-your-face reminders have changed my thoughts and the things I do—like the people I reach out to, and how often I tell people I love them. Final Countdown makes me a better match against the autopilot instincts that would have me act as if death didn’t exist. Death, of course, does exist. In fact, as I explain in a later chapter, we all die a thousand deaths before our one final death. <a id="p75"/>And Final Countdown is one tool that can help us live a life more mindful of that reality.</p>
<p class="follow">What I’m saying is that dying with zero is not only about money: It’s also about time. Start thinking more about how you use your limited time, your life energy, and you’ll be well on your way to living the fullest life you possibly can.</p>
<h3 class="sectionsubtitle">Recommendation</h3>
<p class="left ">If you’re nervous about someday running out of money before you die, then spend some time looking to annuities as a possible solution.</p>
</body>
      </html>