<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>Be Bold—Not Foolish</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="p177"/>
<h1 class="CN">9</h1>
<h1 class="chaptertitle allcaps sans">Be Bold—Not Foolish</h1>
<h2 class="chaptersubtitle paired">Rule No. 9:</h2>
<h2 class="pairedtop notop sectionsubtitle">Take your biggest risks when you have little to lose.</h2>
<p class="left ">Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks and one of the investor “sharks” on <em>Shark Tank,</em> learned entrepreneurship at a young age. At 12, he was selling trash bags to his neighbors. At 16, he was buying stamps and then reselling them for profit. Growing up in a working-class family in Pittsburgh, he remembers his mom urging him to learn a trade, like laying carpet. Instead, Cuban went to study business management in college, which he paid for by giving disco dance lessons and eventually buying and running a campus pub. As it turned out, police went <a id="p178"/>on to shut down the pub for underage drinking, and when Cuban graduated, he was still broke—but he now had the skills and confidence to make it in business. So after a short stint working for a bank in his hometown, the 23-year-old Cuban packed his meager belongings into an old Fiat and drove to Dallas, joining a friend from college who’d sung the city’s praises. There, the two shared an apartment with four other guys, where Cuban’s bed was a sleeping bag on a beer-stained carpet in the living room. But he kept hustling. He got a job as a bartender, and another as a salesman in a software store.</p>
<p class="follow">And when he got fired for defying the boss at the store, he hatched plans for his own company—a computer consulting business called MicroSolutions. A few years later, when he was 32, he sold that company for $6 million and retired for five years.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">Bet When You Have Nothing (or Little) to Lose</h2>
<p class="left ">Eventually, Cuban came out of his early retirement and started the business that made him a multi-billionaire—but that’s really beside the point here. What’s most interesting to me about Mark Cuban’s experience is that none of the bold moves that led to this success felt risky to him—not the move to Dallas or the jobs he took there, not defying his boss, and not the business he started after getting fired. “I had nothing,” he recalled. “So I had nothing to lose, right? It was all about going for it.”</p>
<p class="follow">What Cuban is saying is that he was facing a situation of asymmetric risk: when the upside of possible success is much greater than the downside of possible failure. When you face asymmetric risk, it makes total sense to be bold, to grab the op<a id="p179"/>portunity at hand. At the extreme, when the downside is very low (or nonexistent, as in the “nothing to lose” case) and the upside is really high, it’s actually riskier <em>not</em> to make the bold move. The downside of not even taking a chance is emotional: potentially a lifetime of regret and wondering <em>What if?</em> The upside of taking a chance always includes emotional benefits—even if things don’t work out. There’s a great sense of pride at having pursued an important goal wholeheartedly. If you’ve given something your all, you’ll get a lot of positive memories out of the experience no matter what happens. That’s just another form of the memory dividend I talked about earlier: When you look back from any point during your life, you will remember your actions in a positive light. In other words, even experiences that don’t end the way you’d hoped can still yield positive memory dividends. So being bold is an investment in your future happiness—and therefore another way to maximize the area under the curve.</p>
<p class="follow">Most opportunities don’t present an extreme asymmetry of risk, but if you think them through, you’ll often see that the downside isn’t as high as you might think.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">The Younger You Are, the Bolder You Should Be</h2>
<p class="left ">Bear in mind what I said about investing in experiences, especially when you’re young. The idea is that it’s always good to invest in experiences—but it’s especially good to do it when you’re young. Well, a similar logic applies to being bold: When you’re older, some risks become more foolish than bold.</p>
<p class="follow">This is easy to see with physical risks. When I was a kid, I <a id="p180"/>used to jump off the roof of my garage. It was fun, and I never got really hurt. It didn’t even feel like a risk. But I’d be a fool to try jumping off a roof now, with my 50-year-old body: I’m heavier, and my knees aren’t as good at absorbing shocks. So if I did jump, I’d probably end up in the doctor’s office—and even if the injury didn’t cause lasting damage, I would take a long time to recover from it. In other words, I have much more to lose than to gain from a jump like that. So my days of leaping off the top of my garage are behind me.</p>
<p class="follow">That happens in a lot of areas, where the balance between risk and reward changes with time—until the window of opportunity is gone forever. When you’re young, every risk you take can pay off in a big way if you succeed: Your upside is huge. At the same time, the downside (in other words, what happens when you take the risk and fail) is low, because you have a lot of time to recover. In poker, for example, you can sometimes buy more chips, or “reload.” Well, when you’re young, you’re at a stage in the game of life when you can reload and reload and reload.</p>
<p class="follow">As a result, the long-term impact of any failure ends up being pretty low. When I was 23, I got fired from my job as a junior trader at an investment bank. In that job, I had been in training for the career I wanted, but one day I came in to work tired and was caught resting my head in the booth. Well, that was the end of that job. I was scared and uncertain about what I’d do next, and it was no fun being unemployed for the next month. My unemployment ended when I took a job as a broker—a job that paid well but was not what I really wanted to do, which was trading. Still, I knew I had to do something, and I figured I would see where this broker journey led. I was 23—it was easy to correct course. Even if I hadn’t found the broker job, even if <a id="p181"/>I were an abject failure, I wasn’t going to die, and I wasn’t heading for a soup line.</p>
<p class="follow">Notice that I’m not saying that being bold in situations of asymmetric risk always leads to success, the way it did for Mark Cuban. Sometimes things don’t go your way, no matter how hard you try. What I’m saying is that the “loss” is worth it—it was still a good bet because I knew I had little to lose, I had plenty of time to course-correct, and I still acquired some great memories.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">Career Choices</h2>
<p class="left ">Let’s say you want to become an actor, but you know it’s an intensely competitive field: Most people who move to Hollywood never make it and end up waiting tables between auditions. Your alternative to pursuing a career in acting is a safe office job that doesn’t excite you. So should you leave your safe job behind to move to Hollywood? Well, it depends almost entirely on your age—not on what your parents are expecting of you or what your friends think you should do. If you’re in your early twenties, you should go for it! Give it your all, really exhaust yourself trying for what you want. You can give yourself a few years, and if it doesn’t work out, you can still go back to an office job—or to school to learn a trade.</p>
<p class="follow">That’s exactly what former actor Jeff Cohen did when his acting career didn’t pan out. If you’ve ever seen <em>The Goonies,</em> the 1985 movie about a group of kids on a quest for lost treasure, you probably remember the character named Chunk, the chubby member of the gang of misfits. Chunk was Cohen’s breakthrough role—until that point, his career had consisted <a id="p182"/>of small parts in TV shows and commercials. After <em>The Goonies,</em> the exuberant, funny Cohen seemed on track for a big career in Hollywood—but new roles failed to materialize. What happened? Puberty had turned him “from Chunk to hunk,” Cohen likes to say with a laugh. Hollywood is full of sad stories of former child actors, but fortunately Cohen’s story isn’t one of them. He went on to college and law school, specialized in entertainment law, and is now a partner in his own firm.<a id="px1783"/> So what that his acting career fizzled?</p>
<p class="follow">If you’re in your fifties, on the other hand, moving to Hollywood is not a great plan. At that point, chances are you now have people in your life who are truly depending on you, like a spouse and children. If that’s the case, your failure is no longer your own—it affects other people. It’s for the same reason that I stopped riding motorcycles and taking flying lessons once I had kids: In my mind, I no longer had the right to put my life on the line for the sake of those thrills. And so it is with all kinds of risks: The older you get, the more you have to lose. But it’s not just that the stakes are higher. The potential rewards are also lower! So even if you’re a lone wolf, or your kids are grown and flown, the risk/reward balance still isn’t in your favor when you’re older. In the best-case scenario, where things go spectacularly well for you, you’ll have fewer years to enjoy that success. Wouldn’t you rather have taken the big risk earlier in life?</p>
<p class="follow">I can’t say it’s foolish for anybody to start pursuing their dreams in their fifties, because everybody’s circumstances are different; and if you missed your chance to do what you wanted when you were younger and you see your upcoming retirement years as your last chance to follow your dreams, I’d say it’s better late than never. But if we could go back in time, I would say: <a id="p183"/>Don’t wait. Do the bold thing now, rather than in retirement, because the go-go years are very short. In general, this whole “I’ll wait to do this when I’m retired” is a massive blunder. But if you’ve already made that blunder, go ahead and make the most of the time you’ve got.</p>
<p class="follow">But so many people don’t take advantage of those times when they <em>can</em> easily take risks. And I think it’s because they magnify the downside in their minds—they think of the absolutely worst-case scenario, like homelessness, even if that scenario is not remotely realistic. As a result of that kind of fearful thinking, they don’t recognize the asymmetry in the risk they are facing: In their minds, it’s as if disastrous failure is as likely as any kind of success.</p>
<p class="follow">A couple of years ago I was talking to a young person I know named Christine who had a job selling plastic countertops. There’s nothing inherently wrong with selling countertops, plastic or otherwise, and I’m sure some salespeople get great satisfaction from helping customers find exactly the right countertop for them. It’s just that Christine wasn’t one of them, mainly because her employer wasn’t giving her recognition for all her hard work. She also had very few days off. The job was making her so unhappy that I urged her to take a bold move and just quit. Just quit, without even waiting to line up another job, because holding down that sales job left her with very little time to look for anything better. She was very afraid, though, that not having a job would make it hard for her to get a new job. It’s true that employers are often wary of hiring people who are unemployed—so quitting her job was a risk. But I persuaded her that at 25, she was young enough to take the risk. She could get a job tomorrow waiting tables if she needed to, until she figured out what she really wanted to do. Her downside, in other words, was <a id="p184"/>not as bad as she imagined. Besides, if she couldn’t take the risk now, when could she take the risk?</p>
<p class="follow">She took my advice and quit without having another job lined up. She’s since held a series of positions, including another job she hated but that paid $150,000 a year. (That job made her so miserable that she quit—but then came back to it two weeks later.) The point is that when you’re young you can afford to take a lot of risks because you have plenty of time to recover—you can stumble and stumble your ass off and come back just fine.</p>
<p class="follow">Of course, it’s always easier to quit when you have another job already lined up—but, as I said to Christine, what’s easy shouldn’t determine what you do. Don’t let difficulty dissuade you from living your best life!</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">Quantify the Fear: The Case for Moving</h2>
<p class="left ">One of the biggest ways people avoid bold action is an aversion to moving and travel. Many people won’t even consider moving to a different city, and when an opportunity far from home does arise, I often hear them saying things like “I won’t know anybody there” or “I want to stay close to my mom.” It’s amazing to me that people will root themselves and not seek any new life adventure because they are fearful of moving away from two or three people; if you do that, it’s like letting those two or three people choose where you live.</p>
<p class="follow">It’s not that you shouldn’t care about maintaining relationships. It’s that if you think about the problem rationally, you might discover that you can have the adventure and still main<a id="p185"/>tain wonderful relationships, in addition to making new friends where you go. How do you think through this question rationally? My answer is to quantify every single fear.</p>
<p class="follow">For example, let’s say you have an opportunity to move across the country (or across the world) for an exciting job that pays $70,000 a year more than your current job. But you’re afraid you’ll lose touch with your friends and family.</p>
<p class="follow">When I hear something like that, I ask a couple of questions. One is: How much time do you spend with these people? Often it’s not that much time at all, because we tend to take for granted what is readily available. The other question I ask is: How much is a round-trip first-class ticket from here to there on no notice? This is the highest price you would have to pay to see the people you’d be moving away from. So how does that price compare with your salary gain, not to mention everything else you stand to gain from moving? Even after doing these calculations, people still sometimes decide to stay put. That’s their choice, of course, but I want to point out that what they are doing is saying that they are willing to pay $70,000 for the comfort of not having to move.</p>
<p class="follow">If I had never been willing to move, I would have passed up the biggest career opportunity of my life. This happened when I was 25 and working as an over-the-counter broker, the job I was hired for after getting fired two years earlier. As a natural gas broker, I was making good money, about 10 to 15 times what I was earning in my first job out of college. And I was having fun with my higher salary—but I hated that job. I hated having to cold-call people, and I found it distasteful that my success was so dependent on whether a particular person I was calling liked me or not. Also, the nature of being a broker was that my upside <a id="p186"/>was capped no matter how well I performed. I had some control, but not as much as I wanted. That’s why I wanted to be a trader. If a broker is like a real estate agent, a trader is like the person who buys and sells houses: As a trader, you take all the risk and get all the reward.</p>
<p class="follow">The opportunity to become a trader came unexpectedly. As part of my broker job, I was making what I thought was a routine trip to visit a customer in Texas. Little did I know that I was actually being interviewed: At the end of my visit, my customer offered me the job of head options trader at his company! I remember negotiating with him, as if I were not sure this was a job I wanted to take, but in the back of my head I was thinking, <em>Where are my bags? I’m ready to move!</em></p>
<p class="follow">Other people didn’t understand why I’d want to leave a cushy job in New York City to take a job so risky that I didn’t know if I’d make any money—and to move to Texas, of all places! I’ll admit I had my own stereotypes about Texas, or anywhere south of the Mason-Dixon Line, really—especially as a black person. But my desire for the potential riches that being a trader could bring was so great that I would do anything for the chance to try. I would move to Siberia if I had to. I also knew that I’d hate myself if I didn’t take the job. And what did I really have to lose? If it didn’t work out, I could have gone back to New York City and become a broker again. And knowing that I had tried it would make me proud of myself for the rest of my life, and would make me feel that my life was more meaningful. In this way, even “negative” experiences can bring positive memory dividends.<a id="px1782"/> High upside, low downside.</p>
<p class="follow">Everything happened to work out: I succeeded as a trader and came to love Texas. A week after arriving for my job in <a id="p187"/>Houston, my manager and I went to a charity auction at which we bid on a horse and on a shotgun. So for a while I co-owned a horse, which my friends back in New York thought was bizarre. I no longer own a horse, but I still have that classic shotgun. And while I still maintain friendships with people I met and knew in New York, I’ve built a happy life and found plenty of like-minded people in Houston too.</p>
<p class="follow">I know that, reading all this, you might be feeling tempted to dismiss my experience: <em>Easy for you to say, Bill.</em> Not everybody gets offers to make a ton of money in trading, and certainly not everyone has a cushy job to leave in the first place. But the logic of my experience works at any scale, from someone who leaves a six-figure job and can borrow money from their rich parents to guys who have only two nickels to rub together. The guy working at Burger King who takes night classes to learn computer programming, or the woman who joins forces with a friend to start a food truck business—that’s being bold, too, just on a smaller scale. In all these cases, you can take the safer path of quiet misery or the bolder path that’s less certain but potentially much more rewarding, both financially and psychologically.</p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">How to Be Bold as an Older Person</h2>
<p class="left ">Everything I’ve said in this chapter points to being bold when you’re young. But there are ways to be bold as an older person, too. And those have to do with being brave enough to spend your hard-earned money. You have to have the courage to do the things I described in the “Know Your Peak” chapter—the <a id="p188"/>courage to walk away from a career so that you can spend your remaining time doing what’s more fulfilling. People are more afraid of running out of money than wasting their life, and that’s got to switch. Your biggest fear ought to be wasting your life and time, not <em>Am I going to have</em> x <em>number of dollars when I’m 80?</em></p>
<h2 class="sectionsubtitle">What If I’m Risk Averse?</h2>
<p class="left ">I can understand the fear of risk because my mom is like that: She was a teacher, working for the state, and always wanted me to get a government job of some sort, too. We had so many arguments about that—so-called job security—her saying that a government job gave you a guarantee, a big measure of safety. I always wanted the opposite—to try to lasso the moon. I figured that if the post office was always hiring, and provided a safe income, I could always go work there if all else failed; but there’s no need to <em>start</em> there.</p>
<p class="follow">Yet I understand where my mom was coming from: She’s an African American woman who was born right after the Great Depression and lived for many years before the civil rights era. Life was always unfair and the world seemed out to get you, so it made sense that she was coming from a place of wanting safety before anything else. In fact, her mother—my grandmother—was even more fearful. I’ll never forget what my mom said to me when I made my first million dollars. “Don’t tell your grandmother,” she told me, “because all she’s going to do is worry about you losing it.”</p>
<p class="follow">So I get how your upbringing can make you want to play it safe. People naturally vary in their risk tolerance, and that’s okay. <a id="p189"/>I’m not going to tell you how much risk you should take on. But I will add this: First, whatever level of risk you’re comfortable with, whatever bold moves you might contemplate for your life, you’re generally better off making those moves earlier in your life. Again, that’s when you have a higher upside and a lower downside.</p>
<p class="follow">Second, don’t underestimate the risk of inaction. Staying the course instead of making bold moves feels safe, but consider what you stand to lose: the life you <em>could</em> have lived if you had mustered the courage to be bolder. You’re gaining a certain kind of security, but you are also losing experience points. For example, realize that if you avoid certain risks, you will get 7,000 experience points instead of 10,000. That means you end up with a life that’s 30 percent less fulfilling. If you say that 30 percent less fulfillment is worth the peace of mind you get, well, that’s okay. My grandma, for example, wouldn’t have been able to sleep at night if she’d lived a bolder life, and I can’t fault her for that. How much risk you take on is your own personal choice—I just want you to be aware of the decision you’re making and the full consequences of that choice.</p>
<p class="follow">Third, I’ll remind you that there’s a difference between low risk tolerance and plain old fear. Fear tends to take the actual risk and then blow it out of proportion. If you’re prone to knee-jerk fear reactions to taking bold moves, think through the worst-case scenario. When you consider all the safety nets you’ve got in your life—from unemployment insurance provided by your job to private insurance you can buy against any kind of disaster to good old-fashioned help from your family—the worst-case scenario is probably not as bad as you think. If that’s the case, your downside is usually quite limited—but your upside might be infinite.</p>
<a id="p190"/>
<h3 class="sectionsubtitle">Recommendations</h3>
<ul>
<li><p class="follow">Identify opportunities that you’re not taking that pose little to risk to you. Always remember that you’re better off taking more chances when you are younger than when you’re older.</p></li>
<li><p class="follow">Look at the fears that are holding you back, rational or irrational. Don’t let irrational fears get in the way of your dreams.</p></li>
<li><p class="follow">Realize that at every moment you have a choice. The choices you make reflect your priorities, so be sure you’re making those choices deliberately.</p></li>
</ul>
</body>
      </html>