<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
        <head>
          <title>Copyright</title>
          <link href="css/hmh.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:beb27de5-1e2a-4b30-86d4-c6e3a0ccff99" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
        </head>
        <body><a id="pFrontCover"/><a id="pFrontFlap"/><a id="pi"/><a id="pii"/><a id="piii"/><a id="piv"/>
<p class="center spaceabove1">Copyright © 2020 by William O. Perkins III</p>
<p class="center ">Graphics by Charles Denniston. Used by permission.</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">All rights reserved</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to <a href="mailto:trade.permissions@hmhco.com">trade.permissions@hmhco.com</a> or to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 3 Park Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, New York 10016.</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">
  <a href="https://hmhbooks.com/">hmhbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</p>
<p class="center ">Names: Perkins, Bill (William O.), 1969– author. </p>
<p class="center ">Title: Die with zero : getting all you can from your money and your life /</p>
<p class="center ">Bill Perkins. </p>
<p class="center ">Description: Boston : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2020. | Includes</p>
<p class="center ">bibliographical references and index.</p>
<p class="center ">Identifiers: <span class="smallcaps">LCCN</span> 2019033906 (print) | <span class="smallcaps">LCCN</span> 2019033907 (ebook) | <span class="smallcaps">ISBN</span> 9780358099765 (hardcover) | <span class="smallcaps">ISBN</span>  9780358310280 | <span class="smallcaps">ISBN</span>  9780358310365 | <span class="smallcaps">ISBN</span>  9780358100515 (ebook)</p>
<p class="center ">Subjects: <span class="smallcaps">LCSH:</span> Finance, Personal. | Wealth—Psychological aspects. | Satisfaction.</p>
<p class="center ">Classification: <span class="smallcaps">LCC HG</span>179 .<span class="smallcaps">P</span>3656 2020 (print) | <span class="smallcaps">LCC HG</span>179 (ebook) | <span class="smallcaps">DDC</span> 332.024—dc23</p>
<p class="center ">LC record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2019033906">https://lccn.loc.gov/2019033906</a></p>
<p class="center ">LC ebook record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2019033907">https://lccn.loc.gov/2019033907</a></p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">Cover design by Alex Camlin</p>
<p class="center ">Author photograph © Blue Glass Photography</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">v1.0720</p>
<p class="center spaceabove1">
  <span class="smallcaps">THIS BOOK PRESENTS IDEAS OF ITS AUTHOR. THE AUTHOR IS NOT A FINANCIAL ADVISER, AND THE BOOK IS NOT INTENDED TO BE A SUBSTITUTE FOR CONSULTATION WITH A CERTIFIED FINANCIAL PLANNER, ACCOUNTANT, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL ADVISER. THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIM LIABILITY FOR ANY ADVERSE EFFECTS RESULTING DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY FROM INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.</span>
</p>
</body>
      </html>