<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Copyright, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="copyright-page" id="x9780525508137_EPUB-3">
		<div>
			<span id="_idParaDest-3"/>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Imprint"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_vi" role="doc-pagebreak" title="vi"/>PENGUIN BOOKS</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text">An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text"><a href="http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com">penguinrandomhouse.com</a></p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space">Copyright © 2022 by John Gottman, PhD, and Julie Schwartz Gottman, PhD</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text">Penguin Random House supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin Random House to continue to publish books for every reader.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space">A Penguin Life Book</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space"><span class="SCAP">library of congress cataloging-in-publication data</span></p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Names: Gottman, John Mordechai, author. | Gottman, Julie Schwartz, author.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Title: The love prescription : seven days to more intimacy, connection, and joy / John Gottman, PhD, and Julie Schwartz Gottman, PhD.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Description: First edition. | New York : Penguin Books, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Identifiers: LCCN 2022006721 (print) | LCCN 2022006722 (ebook) | ISBN 9780143136637 (paperback) | ISBN 9780525508137 (ebook)</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Subjects: LCSH: Love. | Interpersonal attraction.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">Classification: LCC BF575.L8 .G664 2022 (print) | LCC BF575.L8 (ebook) | DDC 152.4/1—dc23/eng/20220701</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">LC record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006721">https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006721</a></p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-CIP">LC ebook record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006722">https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006722</a></p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space">Cover design by Luke Bird</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text">Book design by Daniel Lagin, adapted for ebook by Estelle Malmed</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space">Some names and identifying characteristics have been changed to protect the privacy of the individuals involved.</p>
			<p class="x01-FM-Copyright-Text-Space" id="release_identifier_line">pid_prh_6.0_141032872_c0_r0</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>