<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>How to Use This Book, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-7">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x01-FM-Head" id="_idParaDest-8"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxi" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxi"/>HOW TO USE THIS BOOK</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Each of the chapters that follow is going to ask you to introduce one new, relationship-building habit into your day, every day for one week. Seven days, seven new habits. They’ll be easy. They’ll be quick. They’ll be fun. There will be no grand gestures and no big, hard conversations. There are no requirements for when and where you do these exercises with your person. These can be done at any time of day, on the busiest of days; they can be done while you put away the dishes, while driving in the car. There’s nothing to buy, or do, or prepare. You can start immediately.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But before we start, we want to address a few questions you may have about this book, how to use it, and what to expect.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Is It Too Soon?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">If you’ve just met someone you’re interested in, you might be wondering if it’s too early to bring in an “intervention.” There is no <i>too soon</i> to introduce these “best practices” for love. <i>The <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxii" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxii"/>sooner the better.</i> Most couples wait much too long to seek help—an average of four to six years. By the time they come to see us, they’re so far down the wrong path that it takes quite a lot of effort for us to help them find their way back out of the woods. We often think: <i>If only we’d gotten to you earlier!</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">There’s a misconception out there that you only need help with your relationship if you’re having problems. But that’s not how most of us behave in the other arenas of our lives. With everything from our bodies to our careers to, well, our <i>cars</i>, we are proactive—we try to eat right and exercise; we take our cars in for tune-ups <i>before</i> they break down. Why don’t we think about relationships the same way?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s <i>smart</i> to start early—to keep any relationship as healthy and well oiled as possible. If this is a brand-new relationship, you might not even know yet if this is the person you want to spend the rest of your life with—and that’s OK! You don’t need to be 100 percent sure; you just need to know that you want to find out. The data in this book—culled from the most successful relationships we’ve studied—are going to help you get started on the right foot . . . and then keep going in the right direction.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Is It Too Late?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">If you’re coming to this book in a particularly rocky period for your marriage or partnership, you might be wondering if the window to turn things around has passed. Your problems may feel complicated and deeply entrenched. You might be finding it hard to see your way out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxiii" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxiii"/>We can tell you this: In all of our years of research and office practice, it has been very rare that we encounter couples for whom it is truly “too late.” Most couples wait an average of <i>six years</i> of being unhappy before they seek help.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber1" id="SuperscriptNumber1" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a> Whether you’ve been noticing problems for a week or a decade—we can help. The only thing that really spells the end of a relationship is if you’ve both already thrown in the towel. And if you’re holding this book, we’re willing to bet that isn’t the case.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We said that we can predict with 90 percent accuracy whether a couple will stay together or not, and if it’ll be a happy union—but that’s not written in stone. We can’t literally see the future. We simply make our best guess based on the <i>patterns</i> we observe. When people change those unhealthy patterns to healthy ones, they can change their future.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">You might think that the couples who are most unhappy at the beginning of an intervention will benefit the least—that they won’t be able to catch up. But it’s just not true. Our research (and the research of others in the field) shows that couples who are struggling the most actually make the most gains. Everyone can benefit. And if you’re in a rocky patch, you actually stand to change the most.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In short: <i>It’s not too late to strengthen your relationship.</i></p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">What If My Partner Isn’t Enthusiastic about Doing This with Me?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">It would be great if you both read along together. But this is real life, and things don’t always go according to the ideal! If you’re <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxiv" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxiv"/>the primary partner reading this book, share with your partner the most interesting tidbits from each chapter—something like, “Hey, did you know that couples who cuddle have the most sex?” is sure to get their attention.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Tell them this: The exercises are easy. Most can be done in just a few minutes. And they’re <i>fun</i>. Tell your partner that these are all ways to increase passion, connection, and good sex—and to bring a little more lightness and love into the house. We could all use that, no matter how great our partnerships are already.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Can I Really Change My Relationship in Just One Week?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">When we were running the Love Lab, we had plenty of success working with couples and tailoring a fleet of interventions for them to try. But we wondered: What if couples couldn’t take off for a whole weekend of workshops? Could we still make a difference?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">So we ran an experiment (with the help of <i>Reader’s Digest</i> and the writer Joan DeClaire). We brought couples in. They did a full relationship assessment that all couples did who came into the office—exhaustive questionnaires that got into every nook and cranny of their relationship. Then, we sent them off to lunch.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">While they went to get a sandwich, we met with our staff to pore over their answers, evaluate the data, and choose <i>one single</i> intervention that we could do with them in an hour. For instance, training them to positively express their needs without criticizing their partner. When they came back, we did the one intervention we’d chosen. Then, we waited . . . two years.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxv" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxv"/>After those two years, Joan followed up with all the couples. What she found was a staggering success rate for that single intervention. By and large, these couples had changed their dynamic. And they stayed changed two years later.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber2" id="SuperscriptNumber2" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Yes, we pinpointed the intervention that we guessed would be most helpful. But it was striking that one single shift in the way a couple interacted could have this much of an impact on their relationship, and on their lives.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Can these small shifts in habits that we recommend here really change your relationship?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>Yes.</i></p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">We’re in Love. Isn’t That Enough?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">That’s easy. <i>No.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Love is not enough. Because so often, as time goes on, we stop courting each other. We stop prioritizing romance, fun, adventure, and great sex. Life gets in the way. In a study of thirty dual-career couples, the Sloan Center for Working Families at UCLA discovered that relationships often become just endless to-do lists; conversation becomes constrained to errands and planning.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber3" id="SuperscriptNumber3" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[3]</a> In other words, you need to intentionally <i>practice</i> these aspects of the relationship that we’ll lay out for you.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">These practices will help you if you’re dating and wondering what’s next, or if you’ve been married fifty years. This is for any age, any stage. This is our starter kit for a great start, a restart, or a course correction. And all you need in order to begin is a willingness to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_xxvi" role="doc-pagebreak" title="xxvi"/>try.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>