<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 1: Make Contact, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-8">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-9"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_1" role="doc-pagebreak" title="1"/>DAY 1</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-10">MAKE CONTACT</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Alison and Jeremy showed up for one of our weekend couples retreats looking tired. It wasn’t surprising: we already knew from their intake forms that they had young kids and had been working from home, while supervising remote learning, for months. Of course they looked exhausted.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It was nine months into the COVID-19 pandemic, and like everything, the retreat was on Zoom. Not being in the same physical space with our participants, we had to work especially hard to observe their emotional states and body language. But even through the slightly grainy, brightly pixelated Zoom window, we could see Alison and Jeremy’s disconnect. They sat side by side so that we could see them both through our screen, but they could have been in their own separate Zoom squares, sitting in different rooms, miles apart.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Alison and Jeremy explained why they’d enrolled: They felt constantly at odds with each other. They always seemed to disagree on how to handle stuff—everything from how to deal with <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_2" role="doc-pagebreak" title="2"/>a kid not wanting to finish his vegetables to how much risk they were comfortable taking on during the pandemic. Should they see friends outside, or not gather at all? Should they require the kids to wear masks if they went for a bike ride in the neighborhood? Everything turned into a fight; then life intervened before they could resolve it—the kids burst in, or an urgent work issue came up (work had seemingly become a twenty-four-hour activity, now that everything was remote)—and they would end up ruminating on the fight and just getting more upset. They were having thoughts they never used to have about the other: <i>He never really considers my opinion; he just thinks of reasons why I’m wrong. She always pushes her agenda; she always has to win.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“We used to be more in sync,” Alison said. “I mean, with little kids, there’s always been a lot of logistics and dropped balls. But now we’re just never on the same page.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We asked them to describe a typical day. When did they have opportunities to connect? Not to problem solve or work through life logistics—but to talk and listen.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They blinked at us.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“We don’t have any,” Jeremy replied. They hit the ground running in the morning, one of them taking work calls in a bedroom while the other got the kids fed and ready for remote school; one or both of them usually ended up skipping lunch in lieu of squeezing in some work time. Dinner was chaos; then one of them was cleaning up while the other did bedtime. Jeremy said, “By the time I finish doing the dishes and come upstairs, she’s already asleep.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_3" role="doc-pagebreak" title="3"/>We don’t need to be mid-pandemic for this to sound familiar. And you don’t need to have kids underfoot to feel like it’s hard to make time to connect.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Here’s a massive misconception that a lot of us have: For connection to be meaningful, you must give hours of time to it. Therefore, in a busy day, we just don’t have time for it. True?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>False.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We have opportunities for meaningful connection constantly—but we miss them. We don’t know exactly what we’re looking for, and we don’t know how important these seemingly small, fleeting, insignificant moments can be. In the language of the science of love, what we are doing in these quick moments is making what we call “bids for connection.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What’s a bid for connection? Well, it can look like a casual remark. It can be as simple as one person sitting down next to the other one. It can be as subtle as a sigh. It’s an <i>invitation to connect</i>. And how we respond to these tiny bids for connection can actually make or break a relationship! This was one of our first and most foundational discoveries in the Love Lab.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Bids for Connection: The Biggest Predictor of Happiness</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We built our first Love Lab in an apartment on the shores of Montlake, near the University of Washington’s red brick, cherry tree–lined campus. For a lab, it was unusually comfortable. When people walked into it, we didn’t want them to feel like they were in a science lab. We wanted them to feel at home.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_4" role="doc-pagebreak" title="4"/>Julie designed the lab with that in mind—there were paintings on the walls, comfy furniture and cozy throws, a fully stocked kitchen. There was music to listen to and television to watch. The large picture windows framed the lake, smooth and shimmering in the sun (it doesn’t actually rain here as much as people think it does—don’t tell anybody; it’s Seattle’s little secret!). At night, the skyline of Downtown glittered, punctuated by the Space Needle’s famous silhouette. If you didn’t know any better, you’d think you were walking into any thoughtfully appointed Airbnb. You’d drop your bags and head out for a night on the town. But if you were coming to the Love Lab, you weren’t going out. You were there so we could watch you. You might have noticed three cameras mounted to the walls throughout the apartment—we’d figured out that was how many we needed in order to visually monitor the entire space with no blind spots.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Our first big study had 130 newlywed couples visit the Love Lab, one couple at a time. These were couples who were truly in the “honeymoon” period—the months immediately following their wedding. We gave them absolutely no instructions. We just settled them there for the weekend and let them do whatever they would normally do. People watched their favorite shows, they read newspapers, they cooked meals, they cleaned up, they talked, they fought. We watched and recorded <i>everything</i>. We tracked even the smallest behavioral patterns. Everything was coded.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We weren’t sure exactly what we were looking for—at that point, we didn’t know which specific behaviors might turn out to be significant or predictive of future happiness or distress. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_5" role="doc-pagebreak" title="5"/>We just knew that we had to watch closely and code it all so we could find out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Pretty quickly, a pattern emerged surrounding what we started calling bids for connection. One person would make a bid, initiating a moment of connection—it could be physical or verbal, overt or subtle—and the researcher controlling the camera would zoom in close on their partner’s faces. Partners responded to bids for connection in one of three ways:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-First" role="listitem">1. By <b>turning toward</b>: They gave a positive or affirmative response, acknowledging the other person and engaging with their attempt to connect. (Even a “hmm?” can count as turning toward.)</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">2. By <b>turning away</b>: They gave no response, either actively ignoring or just not noticing their partner’s attempt to connect.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Last" role="listitem">3. By <b>turning against</b>: They responded irritably or angrily to actively shut down their partner’s attempt to connect.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What do each of these look like in practice?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Let’s use this example:</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Your partner, scrolling on their phone, remarks, “Oh, this is an interesting article.” <span class="sym">←</span> <i>bid for connection</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Here are your possible responses:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-First" role="listitem">a. You look up and say, “Oh yeah? What’s it about?” <span class="sym">←</span> <i>turning toward</i></p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">b. You keep typing the email you’re working on while staring at your screen. <span class="sym">←</span> <i>turning away</i></p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Last" role="listitem"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_6" role="doc-pagebreak" title="6"/>c. You say, “Be quiet! Can’t you see I’m trying to work?!” <span class="sym">←</span> <i>turning against</i></p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Sometimes, our bids for connection can look negative or hard to read, and we fail to interpret them as an attempt to connect. Let’s look at another, perhaps less obvious, example:</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">You’re sitting quietly at dinner. You give a deep audible sigh. (That’s the bid.) Here’s how your partner might respond:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-First" role="listitem">a. Your partner says, “Hey, honey, is something the matter? You sound tired.” <span class="sym">← </span><i>turning toward</i></p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">b. Your partner is reading the paper; they turn the page and say nothing. <span class="sym">← </span><i>turning away</i></p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Last" role="listitem">c. Your partner says, “What’s the matter <i>now</i>?! <span class="sym">← </span><i>turning against</i></p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In the lab (and in real life!), no couples “turn toward” 100 percent of the time. But whether you turn toward a lot or a little really matters . . . a <i>lot</i>. We followed our 130 newlyweds for years—through their honeymoon months, first pregnancies, births of their babies, and beyond. We saw happiness for some couples, unhappiness for others, and for still others, divorce. Six years later, when we looked back on the data to see what coded behavior had been significant, we found something huge. The couples who got divorced had only turned toward their partner’s bids 33 percent of the time. The couples who stayed together had turned toward 86 percent of the time.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber4" id="SuperscriptNumber4" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a> It was an enormous difference—a statistical gap you rarely see in scientific studies.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_7" role="doc-pagebreak" title="7"/>We’d found a major point of intervention. If we could help couples understand the importance of these little moments that might seem like nothing, just slipping by under the radar, we could really help people turn things around. How people reacted to their partner’s bids for connection was in fact the biggest predictor of happiness and relationship stability. These fleeting little moments, it turned out, spelled the difference between happiness and unhappiness, between lasting love and divorce.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Turning Toward: The Number One Relationship Hack</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We run a two-day workshop for couples where Day 1 is focused on <i>friendship and intimacy</i>, and Day 2 is focused on <i>conflict</i>. Of course, the point of the workshop is that couples tackle <i>both</i> of these essential topics. But we wondered: Which was more urgent? If couples wanted to start with the most impactful interventions, what would help them the most?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">So, we did an experimental study: One group of participants just did Day 1, another group only did Day 2, and the final group did both days. One year later, we recontacted the couples. How was everybody doing?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s probably no big shocker that the group that did both days of the workshop had retained the most <i>lasting changes</i> after a year. But interestingly, the group that only did Day 1 was also doing pretty well! On the other hand, the group that only did <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_8" role="doc-pagebreak" title="8"/>Day 2—<i>conflict only</i>—fared the worst.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber5" id="SuperscriptNumber5" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> The message was clear: Focusing only on conflict was the wrong way to go about things. <b>First, we have to work on friendship.</b></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That’s hard to do, because if you <i>are</i> in conflict, you may have a strong desire to “fix” it. But when we gravitate back to our conflicts first, we can make things worse. Why? Because as tensions rise, our bodies can respond physiologically; we can get overwhelmed and default to our old habitual ways of coping. For example, even after all these years in a loving and rewarding marriage, John has to fight against being immediately defensive. And Julie’s first instinct when things get heated is to run out the door and into the nearest forest.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s extremely hard to change the way people act during conflict. But with turning toward, you’re changing how people act in the little moments that happen every day. That’s much easier to do. And it will eventually help with conflict. We discovered that the more turning toward there is in a relationship, the better couples are at managing their conflicts. Even when conflict goes south, a couple’s capacity to course correct and repair their interaction is <i>based on</i> how much they’ve turned toward each other in the past. With more turning toward, there’s more shared humor, even during conflict. More lightness. More capacity to pause in the middle of a fight and make a peace offering, and more likelihood that that repair attempt will be received and reciprocated. Successful couples don’t fight <i>less</i> than other couples—they fight better. And turning toward is the single biggest predictor of this.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What turning toward really does is put money in a couple’s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_9" role="doc-pagebreak" title="9"/>emotional bank account. Think of every act of turning toward your partner’s bid for connection—even one as simple and fleeting as responding to a smile with a smile—as dropping a coin in your love piggy bank.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we were first married—thirty-four years ago now!—there was something we were better at then than we are now: building a grudge.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Maybe you know what we mean. A conversation gets a bit heated, your partner hurts your feelings, and you withdraw and start building a grudge against them—a litany of all the other ways they have wronged you recently, or since the beginning of time. John thinks back to the early years of their marriage and recalls how <i>actively</i> he would build a grudge—like building a chair, you have to cut the rough materials of your life down to fit it, bang it together, shape it, and sit on it. He and Julie would have a fight or a tiff and, feeling wounded, he’d disappear to do his grudge building. But in a relationship with a lot of turning toward, you hit a point where you go off to build your grudge, but then, you just . . . <i>can’t</i>. John would be sitting there, trying his darndest to put together a durable, sturdy grudge, and there would be this annoying voice in his head. <i>Remember last week when you were sick and she came up to check on you and brought you tea? Remember this morning when she laughed at your joke? Remember earlier today when she went to the trouble to make you lunch, even though she was so busy? When she asked you later how your day was going? Those moments were all pretty nice.</i> He just couldn’t build that grudge anymore.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">As you accumulate all these moments of positivity and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_10" role="doc-pagebreak" title="10"/>connection, they offset the negative ones. A grudge just can’t grow. Every single moment is emotional money in the bank. So when you hit a moment of conflict or tension, you have a <i>lot</i> in your “emotional bank account” to draw on. Even in a thorny moment that could be fertile ground for miscommunication and hurt feelings, you have all this positivity and connection banked, so you’re more able to meet your partner with empathy and even humor. And the way you make positive deposits into your bank account is through turning toward.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">This is what the masters know: that a kiss on the cheek as you pass in the hallway is potent medicine. That looking up from that urgent work email to listen to a minor anecdote about what the baby did with his lunchtime sweet potatoes, in the end, matters more. That taking five minutes at the beginning of your day to connect over coffee far outweighs starting work five minutes earlier.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And so, this was our prescription for Alison and Jeremy. Their days were filled with back-to-back tasks: work, parenting . . . then more work and parenting. They were caught in the relentless cycle of life during a pandemic, with little relief and no real chunks of time to spend focused on each other. And the truth is, pandemic or no pandemic, life can get this way. Busy. Overwhelming. Nonstop. But as we told Alison and Jeremy: You don’t need to magically make more time when there is none. No matter how frantic a day, there are always opportunities to turn toward. It costs very little in terms of time, and the payout is huge . . . <i>and</i> exponential. The more you do it, the more it works.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_11" role="doc-pagebreak" title="11"/>We asked them to find a few minutes at the start of the day for a check-in. They ended up doing it in the morning, in the fleeting few minutes before the kids came tumbling downstairs, wanting three different types of cereal. They’d lean on the kitchen island, standing up, with their elbows on the piles of remote-school paperwork and homework assignments, sipping their hot coffee, and ask each other: What’s on your mind today? What are you looking forward to? What are you anxious about? They always ended up learning something important: a window into their partner’s schedule and inner life. They always ended up laughing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Well, one thing I’m <i>not</i> looking forward to is that teacher who always makes us do animal noises.” Jeremy sighed, and Alison cracked up—she hated it, too.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And then, throughout the day, we asked them to keep a lookout for bids for connection, and to turn toward them instead of letting them slip past. If Alison leaned over to murmur an observation about one of their kids while Jeremy was in the middle of an email, his assignment was to pause, take his hands off the keyboard, and give her his attention. The email would still be there in two minutes. The person who was waiting for it would never notice the difference. But Alison would.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Alison said, in one of our last Zooms: “Things are still hard. It’s tough to balance both of our work schedules with the kids’ remote school and everything else that has to get done. But I guess it just feels like we’re on the same team again. It’s us against the chaos, together.”</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_12" role="doc-pagebreak" title="12"/>You Have the Power</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Turning toward is truly one of the most potent interventions we can recommend. Does it seem <i>too</i> simple and easy? Well, it might be simple, but it’s not always easy to create a new habit. If this is already part of your relationship repertoire, <i>great</i>. Keep it up! This chapter, and the exercise that’s coming up, can serve as a valuable reminder to keep turning toward a priority, not let it slip, and can give even more oomph to the micro-moments of positivity and connection you’re already practicing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">If you feel like turning toward has faded from the culture of your relationship—don’t worry. You can turn this around. Like turning a big ship, there can be a bit of a lag before the course correction you’ve done really starts to show up. But just turning the wheel a little bit, and then a little bit more, can really start to pay off if you keep it up. Think about how that big ship barely seems to shift direction at first, but the farther you go on that new course, the further you diverge from the old one—a widening V that takes you into entirely new territory.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Remember that study we mentioned earlier in this chapter, with the three groups that did the different workshop days? Well, there was one more group. In every study, there’s a control group—that’s typical. But we made a mistake with this control group.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">While group 1 was doing the friendship day, group 2 the conflict day, and group 3 both, the control group didn’t participate in any workshops at all. All they got was our book, <i>The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work</i>, and access to seven hours <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_13" role="doc-pagebreak" title="13"/>with a licensed therapist by phone. Surprisingly, <i>none</i> of the couples in the control group ever accessed the therapist. They only used the book. And, surprise, surprise, they did remarkably well! By simply reading the book, they made significant positive changes to their relationships, and they <i>stayed</i> changed a year later when we circled back to them. While the most successful group was still the group that did both days of the workshop, the book readers came in a close second—they did better than any of the other remaining groups in the study. Their marriages improved, and stayed that way one year later—just from using a book together.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We think the real takeaway here is that if you want to improve the culture of your relationship for the better, with just a little reading, <i>you can do it</i>. Knowledge is power, and once you understand how much bids for connection, and how you each respond to them, can shape a relationship over time, the more you can make choices during a busy, time-pressured day that really align with your goals for your relationship over the long haul.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>