<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-9">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_14" role="doc-pagebreak" title="14"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">THE TEN-MINUTE CHECK-IN</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">This is great to do at the beginning of the day, but you can do this at any time that works for you. The rules are simple—pick a time to check in with your partner when you have ten minutes to listen and not rush off anywhere. It can be in the morning, over coffee and before you start work, or in the evening after you’ve put the kids to bed. Ask them this simple question:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL_aboave-6-pts"><b class="Box_BOLD">Is There Anything You Need from Me Today?</b></p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">How does this create “turning toward”? First, it allows your partner to reflect on their own needs for a moment. Second, it makes clear that you really want to be there for them today if you can. And third, it gives hope that if they state what they need, you’ll try to respond affirmatively.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">It’s just one sentence. But it does a lot. It’s an invitation. It says <i class="Box_ITAL">I love you and I want to be there for you</i>. It’s a great trust builder. Trust, in a relationship, is a biggie. It’s a complicated thing—but the foundations of it are basic. The principle behind trust is, “I’ve got your back, and you’ve got mine.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">So when your partner responds to this question today, do everything in your power to say yes, and make it happen, whether it’s “I need a break from the kids” or “I’d love to have lunch with you.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_15" role="doc-pagebreak" title="15"/>Extra Credit: Pick Up the Pennies</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Today, think of every potential moment of connection—even the most fleeting—as possible money in the bank. Just as you would if you were walking down the street and saw dollar bills and coins scattered everywhere: <i class="Box_ITAL">stop and pick them up</i>. It just takes a minute to bend down and grab it. So make it a point to do so—don’t walk past any of them! Even pennies add up.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Be on the lookout for small bids for connection that you can engage with, turning toward your partner even just briefly. Keep an eye out for these, which are all invitations to connect:</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">Eye contact</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">A smile</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">A sigh</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">A direct ask for your help or attention</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Saying good morning or good night</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Asking for a favor</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Reading something aloud to you: “Hey, listen to this . . .”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Pointing something out: “Look at that!”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Calling your name from another room</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Seeming sad or down</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">Physically carrying something heavy by themselves</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">Seeming frustrated (with the kids, for example)</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Every single moment you respond positively to your partner is money in your emotional bank account. And these <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_16" role="doc-pagebreak" title="16"/>deposits don’t vanish—that positive balance will be there when you need it. With little moments throughout each day, you can make sure that your deposits outnumber your withdrawals.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">What if you notice your partner make a bid for connection, but you really can’t respond?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Of course, this will happen sometimes. Your emotional availability won’t align neatly with your partner’s emotional availability<i class="Box_ITAL">.</i> And that’s OK. So here’s how to handle it.</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para-First"><b class="Box_BOLD">When your partner makes a bid but you can’t engage:</b> Say, “I’d really love to hear about this, but I have to ______ (send this email, get the kids to bed, and so on); can you remember to tell me about it later?” You acknowledge that you <i class="Box_ITAL">want</i> to do the turning toward, but circumstances prevent it. Even if you’re tired and don’t want to engage, don’t ignore the request. Just explaining, briefly, why you can’t be available can go a long way.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD">When </b><i class="Box_BOLD_ITAL">you</i> <b class="Box_BOLD">make a bid and </b><i class="Box_BOLD_ITAL">they</i> <b class="Box_BOLD">don’t respond:</b> If they miss a couple of your bids, just keep trying! But if it’s a pattern, say to your partner: “I don’t want to be critical, but I’ve been reaching out to you . . . what’s happening for you right now that you haven’t been responding?” It might be that they’re busy, stressed, overwhelmed.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD">When a bid is made with negativity:</b> Some of the time, your partner’s bid will sound negative or like they’re picking a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_17" role="doc-pagebreak" title="17"/>fight. (Example: “It wouldn’t occur to you to make dinner tonight for once, would it?”) Just ignore the negativity and respond to the deeper bid underneath. (You might respond: “I get that you’re frustrated and tired. I’d be happy to make dinner and give you a break.”) Wow—that’s worth a lot in the emotional bank <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_18" role="doc-pagebreak" title="18"/>account.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>