<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 2: Ask a Big Question, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-10">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-11"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_19" role="doc-pagebreak" title="19"/>DAY 2</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-12">ASK A BIG QUESTION</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Think back to when you first met your partner. Remember what it was like to have that fresh spark with them? To wait all day to see them, to feel like you were bursting with questions you wanted to ask? Everything from <i>What’s your favorite movie?</i> to <i>If you could live anywhere, where would you live?</i> would roll effortlessly off your tongue as you performed that exhilarating dance of figuring out if this person was <i>the person</i>, the one you could see yourself with for a lifetime.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We had each moved to Seattle within two months of each other. John had just relocated to the West Coast after two decades of teaching in the Midwest; Julie was a Pacific Northwest native returning to her roots after two decades living everywhere else. Our paths crossed in a coffee shop we both frequented. Julie noticed John because he stuck out among the other patrons, looking smart and professorial. John noticed Julie’s confidence and poise. He put down his empty cup and walked over to introduce himself, hoping to strike up a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_20" role="doc-pagebreak" title="20"/>conversation. We started talking. And then we talked some more. And more, and more . . .</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The beginning of a relationship is exciting—there’s so much to discover! The conversations you have are <i>full</i> of big, exciting, exploratory questions. It’s effortless. We asked each other everything: <i>Where are you from and what brought you here? What do you do, and why did you choose it? What do you love to do when you’re not working? What kind of music . . . movies . . . books do you like?</i> Drawn to each other, we were acutely aware of how much we didn’t know about the other, and we wanted nothing more than to find out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">As a relationship develops, it can feel like watching a great new movie: You watch the plot unfold, both hopeful and nervous about all that might happen, as you find out more and more about this thrilling new main character in your life. You ask them about their childhood, about their hopes and dreams, their vision for the future. You discover which friendships are meaningful to them, or their favorite things to eat; you learn how they react when they’re upset or excited. When we’re in that heady, watershed time of first getting to know a romantic partner, we tend to talk <i>a lot</i>. We tell our stories and ask our partners theirs. Share our dreams for the future and ask them theirs. But over time as we get busy and the newness wears off, we stop asking about big things. We may start out with stuff like, <i>Do you see yourself having kids? If you could live anywhere, where would you live?</i> Then, eventually, other types of questions fill our conversations. <i>Did you take out the garbage?</i> or <i>Is it time to schedule the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_21" role="doc-pagebreak" title="21"/>kids’ doctor’s appointments?</i> Questions like these take the place of heart-to-hearts. In part, this is simply practical—we do need to talk about who’s going to do which tasks, what goes on the grocery list, how to manage finances together, and so on. But hectic as life is, we can’t let all our questions for each other become about endless checklists.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Unlike movies, people change over time. That movie you watched with such curiosity and anticipation the first time around will unfold the same way the next time you queue it up. But people aren’t like that. The same questions asked at different points in time will have different answers. Desires morph into new desires. Life goals shift. Bucket lists evolve. If we stop asking the big questions, while expecting our partner’s answers to be identical to those we heard the last time we checked in, we might be in for quite a surprise.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Too Much Space</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">David and Gwen had been married twenty years when they first came to see us. In many ways, they had it all. David had a high-powered career he found fulfilling; they had three beautiful kids and a huge, gorgeous home; Gwen stayed home with the kids and threw herself into motherhood. They enjoyed financial stability—David worked long hours and pulled in a high salary, while Gwen had inherited wealth. So what was the problem? Why were they sitting in our office, on opposite sides of the couch?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_22" role="doc-pagebreak" title="22"/>The first thing they brought up was that since having kids, the romance had drained out of their lives. They never had sex anymore, and the physical distance and lack of sexual intimacy bothered them both. But we quickly discovered that sex wasn’t the central issue—it was just a symptom of deeper problems. They hadn’t really spoken to each other in years. Fifteen years earlier, when their first child was born, they turned their attention away from each other and onto the logistics of life and the immediate concerns of parenthood. The problem was that they never swiveled back toward each other. They asked each other, “Is this the right preschool?” “Did you call the plumber?” “Who’s picking up the kids Friday?” They never asked, “Is this still the life you want?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They might have been living in the same house, but there was too much space between them. In fact, their beautifully designed home was so big, they could walk from room to room and only rarely bump into each other. As a couple, you can live two parallel lives rather than a joint one together. And that’s exactly what they were doing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">David and Gwen showed up in our offices because they didn’t want to continue on like that, but they also didn’t know how to create change. It seemed like any time they tried to connect, they were just too far apart. Everything was a fight or a missed connection, a failure to come together. So we had them begin again with a different category of question. The first step in rebuilding their marriage wasn’t to ask each other “<i>How</i> are you?” but “<i>Who</i> are you?”</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_23" role="doc-pagebreak" title="23"/>A Sheep Named Kevin</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">When the COVID-19 pandemic hit, Brianna and Tyler were living in a small two-bedroom apartment with their baby son. They’d had plans in the works to move to a bigger place across town, but now all that was on hold. The baby’s day care closed and both of them shifted to working from home, trying to hit their full-time hours while swapping childcare duties. It was a lot. And yet their relationship stayed solid. They didn’t turn on each other (even though they joked about being “animals in captivity”). There were plenty of stressors and issues they had to work through—like all couples, Brianna and Tyler had their own unique set of “unsolvable” problems. But through it all—even through conflict—there was an enduring sense of being on the same side.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What is their secret? Brianna and Tyler list various things they appreciate about the other: Tyler pulls his weight with childcare and handles the never-ending laundry. Brianna keeps their schedules well organized and is an innovative cook.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But mostly, this is what we notice: they are just so interested in each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Brianna shares her memory of one of the few times they got to go out on a date during the pandemic. After a two-week quarantine, they drove to Tyler’s mother’s house for a weekend. His mother watched the baby while they went out for a walk. It was snowing; they strolled through Tyler’s old stomping grounds in rural Maine. Brianna had been there plenty of times before. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_24" role="doc-pagebreak" title="24"/>But this time, Tyler pointed out a particular field and started telling a story. He casually mentioned that “this is where Kevin, my sheep, lived.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Excuse me,” she replied. “We’ve been together <i>how</i> many years, and I’m just now finding out . . . that you owned a sheep? Named <i>Kevin</i>?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They walked and talked for hours in the cold, until their fingers were numb and they had to turn back. The sheep named Kevin carried them back down a twisty road through time—they ended up talking about the lives they’d envisioned for themselves when they were teenagers, how their lives were exactly what they’d imagined in some ways, but also so, so different.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Maybe it’s silly, but I’ll never forget that sheep named Kevin,” Brianna said. “It’s when I realized that he’ll never stop surprising me.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Here’s the thing: Anyone can surprise you if you give them the opportunity to do so. Brianna and Tyler have thrived, even through a pandemic lockdown, because they have never stopped being curious about each other.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Nice to Meet You . . . (Again!)</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">People change over the years, especially—as with David and Gwen—when one of them is mostly working and the other is raising kids. David and Gwen made a lot of progress just by shifting gears with the kinds of questions they were asking each other. We started them with ten minutes a day—that was about all <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_25" role="doc-pagebreak" title="25"/>they could manage! But it was enough to get them beginning to know each other again. They went back to the basics. They <i>met</i> each other all over again.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Any relationship is a process of meeting each other, again and again, over the years. You will change immensely over the course of your lifetime, and so will your partner. The cells in your body will shed and regenerate. The structures of your brain will change, radically. And as you go through life, new experiences will prompt you to recalibrate what you want, what you believe, how you see yourself. So take two people going through this chaotic, complicated life together, and they have many opportunities to miss big changes in themselves and in each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Humans are pack animals—we don’t survive without connection to other people. And step one of connecting with someone else is knowing <i>who</i> someone is, and being known <i>by</i> them. And the number one way we find out who someone is—especially what is happening in their own internal world—is by asking questions. We do this naturally, even effortlessly, when we’re dating. Then we get busy, we get involved in getting everything done by <i>being a team</i>. Being a team is great. But we have to remember that we’re still two individuals, growing and changing and evolving over time.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In our work with couples, we talk about creating love maps. By “love map,” we mean an intimate knowledge of your partner’s inner world. Their hopes and dreams. Their beliefs; their fears; their desires. You have to ask questions not only to create love maps, but also to <i>update</i> love maps. And that means asking <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_26" role="doc-pagebreak" title="26"/><i>open-ended questions</i>. That’s what we mean by “big” questions: there’s no yes/no reply that’s possible; no quick drop-down menu of replies. An open-ended question doesn’t have a predetermined answer. (We all know that the only correct answer to “Did you pay the electrical bill?” is “Yes, honey.”) An open-ended question is full of possibility. There’s not one road forward, but many—you don’t know where the conversation will go next or where you’ll both end up. And that’s how you update love maps and make new ones—both by forging ahead into new territory and by looping back to previously mapped territory to see how it has changed. And we can’t save these types of exploratory questions for date nights. They need to be a daily habit, not a “special occasion” thing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">For us, our own relationship has always been a rich, fertile ground for new theories about relationships—about what works to bring people together and the forces that drive them apart. Sometimes we figure something out with each other about how to navigate through a trouble spot, and we think, “Is this true for others? Would this hold up across a longitudinal study?” Our own fights and fixes would lead us back to the lab, where we could experimentally confirm (or disprove) what we’d noticed in our own relationship. Meanwhile, information would emerge from our lab studies that we’d try out ourselves. Our work with clients, our own relationship, the lab—each element of our lives has always informed the others, like a big circle, spiraling upward as we learn more and more about the inner workings of long-term love, how the gears work, what makes it work smoothly, and what gums it up.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_27" role="doc-pagebreak" title="27"/>One of the most powerful interventions that we created for the Gottman Institute came out of a fight that we had. It was . . . a <i>really</i> bad fight.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Gaps in the Love Map</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We’d been married for about four years. We were living in Seattle, running the Love Lab, seeing clients. We enjoyed our busy city life—we had our favorite cafés and restaurants; we took our daughter to parks and museums. But we liked to get out of the city. We started renting a place a few hours north, on one of the rugged, sparsely populated San Juan Islands, with its quiet little town, lush green forests, and endless hiking trails. We went up for a couple of weekends and enjoyed it so much that one summer, we rented a place on the water for a whole month. We went for long walks in the woods and canoe trips in the sea.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Both of us felt recharged by getting out into nature—but Julie especially so. When we arrived at the rental cabin, she could hardly wait to lace up her hiking boots and get out into the fragrant cedar forests, or hop into the canoe and dig her paddle into the fresh, silver water. John, meanwhile, agreed it was all beautiful, but he was just as happy sitting on the couch in front of the fire, toasty warm with a cup of coffee and a book on differential equations.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">One day, arriving back home in the city after a weekend in the woods, Julie said, “I want to buy a cabin on the island.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">John was startled. “Absolutely not,” he said. “No way.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The argument flared like a match. “Why not?” Julie said. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_28" role="doc-pagebreak" title="28"/>“We can afford it!” She listed all the reasons they should go for it. John batted down each one—it wasn’t practical. We couldn’t afford it, not really. We went in circles. We started fighting so much about it, John asked around for a recommendation for a therapist to help. He found one he thought would be a good match—and after the initial consultation, he got the feeling she’d be on his side. (Side note: Not a good reason to pick a therapist!) We started talking things through with her, but we weren’t getting very far—Julie could not understand why John wouldn’t even consider something that was so important to her. John couldn’t understand why Julie seemed so demanding and stubborn about this. We didn’t <i>need</i> a cabin—the home life we had was working just fine.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">One day the therapist said, “John, look. You don’t have to cave in to Julie’s demands. Tell her how it’s going to be and she’ll adapt.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">John was horrified. He’d liked the idea of having someone in his court, but not if this was the solution—this kind of rigid, dogmatic, <i>my way or the highway</i> mentality. “Julie,” he said as they left the office, “do I sound like that?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Yes, she said, he did.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">John still didn’t want to buy a cabin, but he also didn’t want to be that kind of oppositional person. And he didn’t want to have that kind of marriage.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Back at home, instead of in the therapist’s office, we finally started to really talk about it. We asked each other questions. <i>Why do you want this house so bad? Why are you so against getting this house?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_29" role="doc-pagebreak" title="29"/>Julie described growing up in Portland, Oregon—an urban, populated city that also happened to have the largest wild municipal park in the country. The house where she’d lived with her parents was just blocks away, and she’d grown up in that park. She’d gone there to daydream, to run, to get away when things at home were tense—and they often were. When she just couldn’t bear to be home, she’d sneak out the back door at night and sleep in the woods. She fell in love with trees. She felt more comfortable in the forest than around other people. To her, the rich, wet smell of soil and crushed evergreens was the smell of home, and safety.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Ever since she’d moved to Seattle, she’d been looking for that chunk of wilderness where she could feel that way again—and she’d found it, on the island.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">John had grown up in Brooklyn. To him, nature was something to visit—<i>briefly</i>. You go on a picnic, put a blanket down, “and then wipe the nature off when you get home.” But as they talked, he realized that his resistance ran much deeper than that. It had to do with his parents. They’d lived in Vienna, where his father was a rabbi and studying medicine. But they’d had to flee the Holocaust. They lost everything they’d owned—their apartment, furniture, clothes, photographs, and family heirlooms. They’d escaped by walking over the Alps into Switzerland with only a cube of sugar and a lemon in their pockets. When they later immigrated to the Dominican Republic, where John would be born, they arrived with nothing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">His dad used to say, “Don’t ever think that where you’re living is permanent. Nothing is permanent.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_30" role="doc-pagebreak" title="30"/>John’s belief system was that you don’t invest in belongings or property. You invest in education—which is something you can always carry with you, that nobody could ever take away.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">After this conversation, nothing had changed about our finances, our likes and dislikes, our core personalities. But understanding each other better offered a way forward. In the end, we each got what we wanted by striking a compromise: John would support buying a little island cabin, if Julie agreed to keep a kosher kitchen in their house (which was important to John). And if he still felt the same way in two years, they’d sell it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Spoiler alert: We didn’t sell the cabin. This fight of ours took us on a new path—we now live on the island most of the year. But it <i>also</i> led us to a big idea that was a huge breakthrough in our work with couples. We call it the “dreams within conflict” exercise. It’s the idea that most of our fights are not actually about what we <i>seem</i> to be fighting about, but something deeper, hidden beneath our positions on the conflict. When couples have a gridlocked problem where it’s impossible to make progress or even talk about it, there’s often an unrealized or even <i>unacknowledged</i> life dream, lurking below the surface. For us, we spent so much time fighting about whether or not we could afford the cabin that it was years before we finally got to the real question we each needed to answer: “What’s your dream about this issue, and what’s your nightmare?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we took the idea to the lab and into our couples workshops, we found that this approach to conflict (thinking and talking about each partner’s dreams) created major breakthroughs <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_31" role="doc-pagebreak" title="31"/>87 percent of the time—even with very distressed couples.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber6" id="SuperscriptNumber6" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a> Some couples who came to the workshop were already divorced, but they were trying again. It even worked for many of them.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What did this tell us? That most conflict is not ultimately about personality, or about whose turn it is to do the dishes, or about how much money we have (or don’t have) in the bank. It’s about dreams, values, meaning, history, even <i>multigenerational</i> history. And this is why love maps matter. Why <i>questions</i> matter.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The more thorough your mapping of each other’s inner landscape is, the more comprehensively you’ll understand not only your partner’s ideas about the future, but also their past and how it’s shaped them. In our case, there were some big gaps in our love maps for each other. The more you fill those in, the more you will understand—quite literally—<i>where</i> your partner is coming from. We use that phrase all the time, but it’s fascinating how perfectly it can describe knowing and being known by someone. You both had a whole life before you met each other. You come from your own unique “country”—filled with history and pain and joy, infinite detail and nuances—and your partner comes from another. When you seek to make a map of the “place” your partner comes from, you need to realize that this “mapping” will never be finished—it’s a lifelong project of learning who your partner is and how they may change over time. And we’ll promise you one thing: if you approach your partner with curiosity, you will never run out of new facts to discover. Even after a lifetime together, there will still be new stones to turn.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_32" role="doc-pagebreak" title="32"/>Be a Topographer, Make a Map</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">William and Marianne have lived on Orcas Island in Washington State for years. Like many people on the island, they moved up there to live a different kind of life—to live simply and sustainably, to use only what they needed, to make do with what they had. They don’t have a lot, but they don’t seem to mind—they grow much of their own food in their garden, and Marianne prides herself on fixing up broken equipment and furniture. The house they live in is one they built themselves. Their daily routines are familiar grooves worn from frequent use; they get along fine but sometimes worry that things are growing dull.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">With the comfort and ease of mature love, we might miss the freshness and excitement of new love. We might think there isn’t really anything new to explore about a partner. But the landscape within each of us, and within our partner, is always shifting and changing. And further, there is so much we might not have discovered, even after spending decades with someone. What happens when we start asking big questions again? <i>Surprises</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">William and Marianne had for years been working around their broken oven. It was one of those things she kept meaning to fix but just hadn’t managed to. Besides, just using the stove top was working fine. They got along with that broken oven . . . <i>for fifteen years</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Then came the COVID-19 pandemic, and like everyone, William and Marianne were marooned at home, looking for ways <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_33" role="doc-pagebreak" title="33"/>to fill the time. One day, Marianne asked William what he was interested in doing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“One thing I’d really love to do is bake, and there’s no way to bake,” he said. “Couldn’t we get the oven fixed? I really want to bake!”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Marianne was startled—William had never shown the slightest interest in baking in all these years. “Well,” she said, “OK, if you really want to.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">She put her “Ms. Fix It” pride aside and they called someone in to take a look at the oven. It turned out to be a really easy fix. And lo and behold, William was a <i>fabulous</i> baker. He immediately started churning out gorgeous loaves of bread, rye and sourdough, and all types of cakes, cookies, and muffins. It’s been a complete delight. They work on baking projects together now, and William talks about how he learned to bake bread and why he loves it—all kinds of childhood memories emerged that Marianne had never heard before. He talked about how he’d always fantasized about opening a bakery someday.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s been a wonderful activity for them—it has them spending time together, having fun, talking about the future again—and for all these years, she just had no idea.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">This is your goal today, and for the rest of this week: Become a topographer. A love-map creator. Think of it as your job: You’re going to go into this landscape that you think you know and <i>really</i> look around. What has changed? Where are the blind spots in your knowledge of your partner’s inner world?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">After thirty-four years of marriage, John is still doing this <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_34" role="doc-pagebreak" title="34"/>with Julie every day. He’s always wondering: <i>What’s on her mind right now? What does she have on her plate today? What’s she worried about? What is she looking forward to? What’s going on in our lives that’s new (new friends, a new routine, the possibility of becoming grandparents) that I could check in about, to see what she’s thinking about those things? What do I know about her right now, and what do I</i> not <i>know about her?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In other words: <i>What am I missing?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Often, when you start exploring, you find not only the information you were seeking, but something unexpected as well. The love map becomes a treasure map.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>