<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-11">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_35" role="doc-pagebreak" title="35"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">ASK A “BIG” QUESTION</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Today’s assignment: Ask your partner one big question and see where it goes. A <i class="Box_ITAL">big question</i> is an <i class="Box_ITAL">open-ended</i> question; there’s no dead end of a yes/no answer available. There is no one right answer—there are many—and your job as topographer is to follow your partner in whatever direction they go.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">A big question doesn’t have to be serious or momentous or tackle the meaning of life—although it can! Consider these:</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">What are some unfulfilled things in your life?</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">What legacy do you want our kids to take from your family?</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">How have you changed in the past year?</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">What are some of your life dreams right now?</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">A big question can also be fun, light, silly:</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">If you could change into any animal for twenty-four hours, which one would you choose and why?</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">If you could design the perfect house for us, what would it look like?</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Last">If you could wake up tomorrow with three new skills, what would you pick?</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Use one of these, or come up with one of your own. Just make it open-ended, and make it something fun to think <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_36" role="doc-pagebreak" title="36"/>about and discuss. You don’t need to delve into your toughest topics or points of conflict today. You’ll be surprised at where some of these questions will take you.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Here’s one of our favorites, which is a great one whether you’ve just met or have been together for fifty years:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">What Are Five Movies That You Feel Have Changed Your Life?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">One couple we worked with started with this question—the husband posed it to his wife of two decades, and they never got past the first life-changing movie she thought of: <i class="Box_ITAL">Singles</i>, the 1992 classic set in Seattle about a group of twentysomethings making music, working in coffee shops, launching their careers, falling messily in love. She described how watching the movie as a teenager imprinted the idea in her mind that she would, someday, be a twentysomething living in Seattle, working in a coffee shop. When she graduated from college, that’s exactly what she did—and it was where she met her husband, who smiled at her and struck up a conversation over the screaming milk steamer as she made him a latte. The movie was responsible for their lives together—and she was shocked to discover that he’d never seen it. They watched it immediately, and spent the whole evening talking about the lives they’d each envisioned when they both first moved to the city years ago, how their joint life today was similar to that early vision, how it was different. They talked about the ways they’d both <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_37" role="doc-pagebreak" title="37"/>gradually gotten a bit off track from their dreams, and how they could get back on.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Ask a big question—and just see where it takes you.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Extra Credit: Keep the Conversation Going</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Encourage your partner to say more. Make exploratory statements. Express interest and curiosity. You don’t have to have a response to everything, and you don’t have to solve their problems. In fact, try to resist problem-solving. That’s a different kind of conversation and isn’t the goal today. Making love maps is about listening, learning something new about the person you love, being surprised. If you feel the instinct to jump into problem-solving mode, or rebut something they’re saying, just mentally set it aside. Tell yourself: <i class="Box_ITAL">Not now—you can talk about that later.</i></p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Easy ways to keep up the momentum:</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-First">“Tell me more about . . .”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">“Tell me the story of that!”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">“How did you feel when that happened?”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted">“Go on . . .”</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">You want to start asking your partner more big questions, and you want to <i class="Box_ITAL">be asked</i> big questions by them. But maybe it seems hard or unfamiliar to start. Here are a few suggestions to consider if you have trouble getting the ball rolling:</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para-First">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para-First"><b class="Box_BOLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_38" role="doc-pagebreak" title="38"/>Where are you in your relationship?</b> If you’ve just met, you don’t want to ask something too personal. The person you’re just getting to know may not be ready to jump into a conversation about their closely held life dreams and desires. Don’t rush it—you’re just starting to map each other’s terrain. You’ll keep filling in details as time goes on, especially if you make it a habit to always be wondering about your person, and trying to fill in the knowledge you lack.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD">How much time do you have?</b> The deeper the question, the longer you need to discuss it. You don’t want to ask your partner about painful memories from childhood right before guests arrive for dinner. Pick a question that’s proportionate to the moment. Over dinner is a great time, and you can broaden it to include kids or parents, or other family members and friends. “If you could magically have any skill or talent, what would you choose, and why?” appeals to ages four through one hundred.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD">Take a hike.</b> If you’re feeling rusty at this style of communication (maybe it’s been a while since you asked each other these kinds of questions), invite your partner on a walk. When you’re not sitting there, staring at each other, but walking instead, you can shake off the dust and awkwardness! Somehow, moving your bodies helps oil the gears. And you can always take advantage of a small moment when you’re doing something together—folding the laundry, cooking together, or cleaning out the garage.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_39" role="doc-pagebreak" title="39"/>Make it a game.</b> Download our free Gottman Card Decks app, which is full of virtual “card decks” full of questions and prompts inspired by the actual card decks we use in our workshops with couples. Find the deck called “Open Ended Questions.” Take turns flipping through the cards and picking a question for the other to answer. Sometimes it’s hard to find the perfect, natural, organic moment to ask a big question—instead, try the spontaneous “Let’s play a game!”</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><b class="Box_BOLD">Model it.</b> If your partner is slow to engage with the questions you pitch, offer information about yourself to soften the way. “If you could have a second career of any kind, what would you see yourself doing?” You answer it for yourself: “Since the pandemic, if I had it all to do over again, I’d be an epidemiologist. I’d love to do that instead. I used to be so interested in science, but I thought I wasn’t good at it and never pursued it. I’ve been finding it fascinating, and what an amazing way to contribute. Anyway—what about you?” Show the way forward into the kind of conversation you want to have; it will make it easier for them to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_40" role="doc-pagebreak" title="40"/>follow.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>