<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 3: Say Thank You, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-12">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-13"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_41" role="doc-pagebreak" title="41"/>DAY 3</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-14">SAY THANK YOU</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Every partnership is unique, with its own unique challenges borne from each of our past histories, personalities, desires, communication styles, and more. On top of all that, the world puts its own pressures on us. Financial pressures. Work demands. Family demands. Discrimination. Every couple who walks through our door is an original, one-of-a-kind pairing, a mix of all of these factors and forces—there is no other relationship out there exactly like it. But at the same time, one of the incredible privileges of having worked with so many couples, across so many demographics, is being able to see the points of overlap where we are all the same. And one of the big points of overlap is this: We all want to be appreciated. To be acknowledged for our efforts. We all want to be <i>seen</i>.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">You’re Wearing Blinders</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Noah and Melissa, a couple in their late thirties, had been successful in a lot of ways. Accomplished professionals, they excelled <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_42" role="doc-pagebreak" title="42"/>in their fields. For ten years, they’d been working hundred-hour weeks, launching and running their own company. They’d built a house together. Had a baby. The baby was now a toddler, and after a long wait, they were about to adopt another child. Wanting a change of lifestyle, they sold their company and the house they’d built; bought a new place, tried to slow down. But they were, as they described it, “on a treadmill of finding stuff to do.” They launched themselves into renovating the new house; Melissa started writing a book. Things felt busy as ever.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They were ambitious, driven, smart, and hardworking—and they were exhausted. Ten years of overtime, of parenting, of every block of time being spoken for had left them burned out and overwhelmed. They had so much on their plate, it was spilling over. And they each felt they were shouldering the responsibility to tackle it all. When they looked around, all they saw was everything <i>not</i> done, everything the other one <i>wasn’t</i> doing. The latest stack of bills unpaid; the electrical wiring for the new bathroom still unfinished; the endless lists of parenting tasks that someone had to do (the doctor appointments, new shoes, more diapers, and so on). They were immersed in the never-ending churn of work, life, and parenting, and the to-do list only seemed to get longer. They both felt like they were working as hard as they could and yet still losing ground. It was easy to look at the other and see (and then say) all the ways they were falling short.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Melissa had a matter-of-fact, analytical way of pointing out all of Noah’s failures—he was supposed to have done <i>x</i> or <i>y</i>; he should have known to plan for <i>z</i>. To which Noah would respond explosively, getting angry and defensive. He felt wronged and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_43" role="doc-pagebreak" title="43"/>maligned by her criticism, and lashed out. His reaction sparked more criticism from her—and the cycle continued, unbroken.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Noah and Melissa’s situation isn’t unusual. Couples are working so hard these days that they’re on parallel tracks—like trains, they power along on their separate paths, never intersecting. We’re each so caught up in planning what we have to get done, and then actually <i>getting</i> it done, that we don’t often notice what the other person is doing. We have tunnel vision for our own tasks, challenges, our infinite to-do list—and it’s a lot. We effectively have blinders on.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">For a long time in the field of couples counseling, therapists assumed that unhappy couples were not being very nice to each other over the course of a typical day—in other words, not doing enough positive stuff like turning toward each other’s bids for connection, helping each other out, making gestures of affection, and so on. They’d prescribe “positivity days” on which partners were tasked with increasing acts of kindness and service toward each other. Pretty quickly though, they tossed this tactic into the wastebasket—it didn’t work. It turned out that, in general, people <i>were</i> being nice to each other—they just weren’t noticing their partner doing it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In 1980, two researchers, Elizabeth Robinson and Gail Price, ran a study in which they positioned two observers in people’s homes, one to observe each spouse.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber7" id="SuperscriptNumber7" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a> The mission of these observers was to objectively look for the positive things that people did for their partners. Meanwhile, they trained spouses to observe each other and record “pleasing and displeasing” behaviors on a spouse observation checklist.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_44" role="doc-pagebreak" title="44"/>What they found was amazing: Couples who were unhappily married missed 50 percent of the positive things the other partner did. It wasn’t that the happily married couples were doing more sweet or helpful things for each other than the unhappily married ones—they were simply <i>better at seeing</i> their partner doing them.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we observe our partners (and, in fact, when we observe our life in general), we have the tendency to notice the negative instead of the positive—the negative leaps out like a flashing neon sign. In part because of some evolutionary aspects of how the human brain works, we scan for problems by default, because solving them will help us survive. We also want to believe that we are objective observers of the world; that the information we gather is unbiased. Brain science tells us the opposite: When you’re looking for problems, that’s what you’ll see. The attention and processing networks in your brain, which filter the world based on your assumptions and expectations, make sure of it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Psychologist Robert Weiss coined the term “negative sentiment override” to describe what happens when negative feelings about a relationship become so strong and habitual that they negatively color the positive moments that are actually happening right before you.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber8" id="SuperscriptNumber8" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> When you’re in the negative perspective, you see your partner and their actions through a distorted lens. You’re not seeing clearly because you’re not seeing the whole picture. You focus on the negative, miss the positive and even neutral events, and interactions become tinged with negative interpretations.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_45" role="doc-pagebreak" title="45"/>Consider whether the following examples sometimes describe you:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Para-First" role="listitem">1. <b>You only see the things your partner has done wrong.</b> Imagine following your partner through the house all day, noticing, cataloging, and tracking every time your partner does something wrong or neglects to do something right. You don’t let anything slide. You’re building a list of all the ways your partner is falling short and failing you. You stop giving them the benefit of the doubt. When you see a pile of lunch dishes in the sink, you don’t think, <i>Well, he had back-to-back Zoom meetings and was pressed for time.</i> You think, <i>He doesn’t care about our home as much as I do.</i></p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Para" role="listitem">2. <b>You don’t tell your partner what you need or wish for.</b> You feel that the things you need them to do are so obvious, you shouldn’t have to point them out or ask. You think, <i>He knows this needs to get done and is just ignoring it</i>, or <i>She knows this is important to me and doesn’t care.</i> And when they don’t step up and perform the way you want them to, you blame them for not doing it.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Para-Last" role="listitem">3. <b>You <i>do</i> ask your partner for what you need or want, but when they don’t do it in the same way you would, you criticize.</b> Your goal makes sense: for stuff to get done, and to get done right! You’d like him to do the laundry . . . but not shrink your sweaters. You’d like her to cook dinner once in a while . . . but not overcook the expensive lamb chops you bought. You give your partner a task that they are willing to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_46" role="doc-pagebreak" title="46"/>do for you . . . but then overcontrol how they do it. The end result isn’t that they want to do it better next time; it just makes them not want to do it at all because they hate being controlled. And everybody ends up feeling resentful.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">A thriving relationship requires a thriving <i>culture of appreciation</i> between partners, where we’re as good at noticing all the things our partners are doing right as we are at noticing what they’re doing wrong. It’s easy to fall into the trap of only seeing what they’re <i>not</i> doing. You develop a narrative where you’re the one putting in all the effort, and you start to believe it’s true. When you’re only scanning for the negative, you’ll easily find just that.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Disrupting this default mental habit means building a new one: scanning for the positive. If your culture of appreciation is waning or nonexistent, this is the most immediately effective tactic to jump-start its resurrection. Change your default setting and look for what’s <i>right</i> instead of what’s wrong.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Changing Your Filter</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">One couple we worked with was able to make a big change in this department, and it was all thanks to . . . <i>coffee</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When Joel and David came in to see us, they were in a pattern of disappointing each other. Both felt they could never do enough to satisfy the other, no matter how hard they tried. Each reported a litany of complaints about the other—mostly small <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_47" role="doc-pagebreak" title="47"/>stuff, but we all know how that small stuff adds up like dishes in a sink, one dirty fork at a time. Both felt put upon, like he was doing everything. Both felt resentful.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">One day they arrived for their session and seemed different. The shift in energy between them was palpable. There was a new warmth and closeness, and they even sat closer together on the couch. They seemed relaxed and more open than usual; the session was positive and productive.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We asked: What had changed?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They looked at each other. Joel smiled and shrugged. “He thanked me for making the coffee,” he said.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The week before, Joel had gone away on business. It was his habit to get up early and make coffee. He’d leave it in the carafe, nice and hot, when he left for work, so when David (a major night owl) got up, there’d be a hot, fresh cup ready to go. Joel had done it for so long—since the early days of their relationship, before they were married—that it had become part of the background, something David had stopped noticing long ago. But when Joel was gone that week, David woke up to a silent kitchen and a cold, empty coffeepot. Grinding his own beans and fumbling around with the unfamiliar machine, he realized how much he appreciated and depended on that small, daily act of kindness. He started wondering what else he was taking for granted, what else he was missing.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Of course, one “thank-you” didn’t magically fix everything. What it did do, though, was jostle their negative filters loose. David put it this way: “When I started looking for what he was <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_48" role="doc-pagebreak" title="48"/>doing right, it was just everywhere. Sure, there are still plenty of problems that pop up, but there are so many more positives, the problems just don’t seem to make a dent anymore.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Scanning for the positive, instead of the negative, is a different way to use your brain—you have to train your brain to do this. Because you are, in many ways, preprogrammed to be on the lookout for the negative by default, this isn’t quite as easy as flipping a switch and deciding to notice the positive. It’ll take a little bit of effort at first—like learning to ride a bike. But here’s a piece of good news: the human brain has incredible neuroplasticity, which means that you can “rewire” your neural circuitry by practicing looking for the positive.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Neuroscientist Richard Davidson, founder and director of the Center for Healthy Minds at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, discovered that positivity can actually be <i>seen</i> on a brain scan. The study used an electroencephalogram (EEG), which detects electrical activity in the brain through little electrodes attached to the scalp. When people are asked to describe their typical day during an EEG, those with depression have a lot more activity on the frontal right side of the brain than on the left, which is where we process fear, sadness, and disgust, among others—emotions that often cause us to withdraw from the world or avoid interactions with others. Meanwhile, the frontal left side of the brain is where we see the emotions that drive us to <i>approach</i> others and the world in general, like love, interest, curiosity, and even anger—anger is actually an “approach” emotion that gets you to engage with others, not withdraw. The <i>positive brain</i> and the <i>negative brain</i> not only look different on a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_49" role="doc-pagebreak" title="49"/>brain scan, they also function differently—specific regions and pathways are electrically activated. When people are locked into scanning their world for the negative, it affects all of the brain’s processing, shaping what you perceive, what you pay attention to, and how you feel—it’s shaping your <i>experience of life</i>. It not only shapes how you see the world around you but also has “downstream effects,” impacting your mental and even physical health.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber9" id="SuperscriptNumber9" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[3]</a> Davidson found that mindfulness meditation—the practice of moving your attention back to the present moment whenever it wanders away—can reverse the negative habit of mind, first during meditation sessions and then, eventually, more permanently.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber10" id="SuperscriptNumber10" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[4]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The point is: When you’re spending your time scanning for the <i>positive</i> instead of looking for the <i>negative</i> (for most of us, unfortunately, scanning for the negative is our brain’s default mode of operation), you change your brain functionality at the cellular level. You create new pathways and activate new synapses. You train your brain to perceive the world differently, without that negative lens. It’s good for your brain, your body, and your relationship.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">The Power of the Positive Perspective</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We ran a study on couples experiencing domestic violence to see if brain training for positivity, along with better ability to self-soothe, could make a difference for them. Now, a quick note: When we work with couples experiencing domestic violence, we’re not talking about severe domestic violence with a victim/<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_50" role="doc-pagebreak" title="50"/>perpetrator dynamic. We work on developing interventions for couples who experience mild to moderate domestic violence, where both partners can become violent during an escalated conflict, but no injuries are inflicted and both want to change. For this study, we developed a curriculum for people experiencing significant stress: couples who were in poverty and trapped in a cycle of getting violent during conflict.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">To really <i>show</i> people what was happening in the brain and the body, we incorporated a small biofeedback device called the emWave (made by HeartMath) that measured heart rate variability and displayed colored “zones” to alert people to their mental and physical states. In the red zone, they were in a state of high arousal (not the good kind of arousal!), emotionally flooded, and prone to violent outbursts. But they could get to the green zone by slowing down their breathing, taking longer to exhale than inhale, and also <i>thinking about something positive</i> in their life that they felt affection or gratefulness around. The visualization of the positive was a powerful tactic to let go of stress, regulate the heart rate, and stay in the green zone.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The couples met two times a week with facilitators, using the biofeedback device for five minutes at a time while practicing the breathing and positive thinking exercises. By the end of the twenty-week study, and even a year and a half later, we saw diminished hostility, improved friendship, and greater passion and romance.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber11" id="SuperscriptNumber11" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[5]</a> We had <i>eliminated</i> domestic violence and completely changed their physiology during conflict so that people could be calm even while disagreeing. The positive perspective <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_51" role="doc-pagebreak" title="51"/>is powerful—it significantly helped turn things around for extremely challenged couples, which means it can be a potent technique for us all.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Retrain Your Brain!</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">When we started working with Noah and Melissa, it was clear that they were in this kind of negative-filter mode. They were “red flagging” each other all day long. So the first thing we did was put a moratorium on criticism: It was henceforth banned! Zero critical comments were allowed. We put it to them this way: “Your brain is going to be finding negatives. Don’t let the words that appear in your brain sift down and come out of your mouth. Just let them fall away unsaid, like sand.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The next step we asked them to take was to spy on each other. Watch the other person like a hawk all day and notice: <i>What are they doing right?</i> Just observe, without any intervention or commentary, and let’s see what you find out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Lo and behold, Melissa discovered that Noah was doing a ton of stuff for her and for their family and household. He gave the baby her bath every day, for one thing, and she noticed for the first time how much time and effort went into it, and how sweet he was with their daughter, how well he managed her. He was doing extra errands and housework so she could have more time to work on her book. She’d been feeling anxious about the book project and pressured, and he was giving her a lot of encouragement and emotional support. She was really stunned by <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_52" role="doc-pagebreak" title="52"/>how much he shouldered. She felt her own load lighten—even though her to-do list was still just as long. It felt different, knowing how much Noah was carrying, too.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we helped her to recognize all the positive work he was doing, she started saying, “Thank you for doing that,” all the time. It came to her naturally once she started seeing his efforts—she felt touched and grateful, and she said it out loud. And Noah? He absolutely <i>melted</i>. If he’d been all spikes and hard edges before, now he was a puddle of warm jelly. His defensiveness, combativeness, resentfulness—it all just fizzled away. Their negative downward spiral reversed right before our eyes—there was so much more warmth coming from her, it was easy for him to reciprocate and thank <i>her</i> for everything she was doing, even with the book project demanding so much of her time. The cycle of positive reinforcement and appreciation was like an updraft, carrying them higher and higher.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">During the coronavirus epidemic, we saw many couples struggling with the negative filter. Mental health professionals reported a major spike in rates of depression. The constraints of pandemic life became a kind of crucible, putting us all under unusually high amounts of stress and pressure as external forces beyond our control kept us all home, cooped up with each other twenty-four hours a day. When you’re suddenly together all day every day, you might be noticing a lot of ways that your partner does things differently than you would; their priorities are not in line with yours. Watching your partner walk past a pile of laundry to make themselves lunch when you’ve been cleaning up all morning can try the patience of a saint. But let’s come back to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_53" role="doc-pagebreak" title="53"/>the fundamental truth: at our core, we are <i>pack animals</i>. Pack animals do best when they try to cooperatively survive under stress, rather than crumble into an “every man for themselves” mentality. The more we can interact in a positive way—even if it feels like a stretch at times—the easier it will be to get through, and even flourish, amid challenging times. Looking for what your partner is doing right is a small mental adjustment that will, over time, not only change the processing patterns of your brain, but will also become a powerful antidote to the relationship breakers we call the “Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.” These come galloping in when we don’t build a strong culture of appreciation: criticism, contempt, defensiveness, and stonewalling.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What we can do to drive out the Four Horsemen—or stop them from ever getting in in the first place—is <i>to make the invisible visible</i>. We find the good that’s been hidden and overlooked, notice it, and appreciate it. And further, we can turn our lens on ourselves. Ask yourself: When you feel affectionate toward your partner, or grateful for them, do you express it? Do you communicate it? Or are you assuming that they somehow already know?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Instead of keeping those thoughts and feelings silent, we’re going to work on establishing a new habit of saying them out loud. If you feel it, <i>say it</i>. When you introduce this habit, it’s incredible how quickly the dynamic between you and your partner can heal or improve. A couple we worked with recently, Tony and Sunny, was in a particularly challenging situation: the husband, Tony, was co-parenting his daughter with his ex-wife, Jennifer. Tony’s relationship with his ex-wife had become, unfortunately, very toxic. The nuances of co-parenting had become difficult to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_54" role="doc-pagebreak" title="54"/>navigate; stress was high, and Tony and Sunny found themselves constantly fighting over how to handle every interaction or issue with Jennifer. It felt to them like they were being targeted and attacked from the outside by Jennifer, like she was intentionally injecting stress and trauma into their marriage. But, in reality, Tony and Sunny were so focused on stress and crisis that they were also focusing on everything negative that the other one was doing, and that magnified their stress. They weren’t being affectionate. They weren’t seeing the positive. They were constantly criticizing each other, too. When Tony had an issue with Jennifer, he now felt he couldn’t bring it up with Sunny because she’d twist it and hear it as an attack on her. The negative filter was so pervasive that by the time we saw Tony and Sunny, their attitude was, “Why are we even in a relationship? What’s the point?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Our intervention? <i>Change the focus.</i> Accept that there’s going to be stress and difficulty from Jennifer. There’s nothing you can do about that. Instead, focus on making a space inside the home and the marriage healthy and supportive for each other. We gave them each a mission. Tony’s goal was to make Sunny’s week positive. Sunny’s was to focus on appreciating Tony’s efforts.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When they shifted the focus, they were suddenly able to see how wonderful their partner was, and how much they were each doing. They were able to problem solve together, and to manage Jennifer and co-parenting without letting that toxicity creep into their own relationship and drive a wedge between them. It was actually quite amazing. In our actual sessions, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_55" role="doc-pagebreak" title="55"/>we were only able to minimally help Tony and Sunny. They did it themselves, at home, by really employing this strategy of appreciation. They became highly skilled at shielding their relationship from that barrage of negativity. They’d made it bulletproof.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>