<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-13">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_56" role="doc-pagebreak" title="56"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">SAY THANK YOU!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Saying thank you is one of the first things we’re taught as children—to show appreciation and gratitude when someone does something kind, or goes out of their way, for us. You probably say it automatically, almost without thinking, all day long: to your work colleagues, the bagger at the supermarket, the stranger who holds the door for you. But in our most intimate relationships, we can forget how important saying thank you really is.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Our partners want to know that they’ve pleased us. That their efforts—however imperfect they can sometimes be—are still seen and appreciated. That they aren’t taken for granted or invisible. For David and Joel, saying thank you broke the ice and opened up a new path forward. Melissa and Noah found that when one person started the cycle of appreciation, it was so easy for the other to join in and strengthen it. Here’s your assignment for today:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step One: Be an anthropologist.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">For the rest of the day (or tomorrow, if you’re reading this at night), your job is to <i class="Box_ITAL">be a spy</i>. Forget your to-do list. Take a few hours off work. (Or call in sick—we’ll sign the doctor’s note!) If that’s not possible, carve out whatever time you can to be around your partner as they’re going about their day. To train your mind to do this, you need to—for a short <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_57" role="doc-pagebreak" title="57"/>time anyway—eliminate all other distractions, and just <i class="Box_ITAL">watch</i>.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Keep a close eye on your partner today, whenever you can. Follow them around. Write down everything your partner does, especially the positive stuff! Don’t write down the negatives, such as ignoring a pile of papers you asked them to pick up. Instead, note that they worked hard all morning with intense focus and got a lot done, or that they cleaned up the breakfast dishes, fielded phone calls, picked up the toys strewn all over the living room, made you a coffee when they went to make one for themselves. Notice the steps in some of the tasks that have been their department for so long, because you might not know what’s involved. For example, one couple we worked with tried this exercise, and the spouse who was “playing anthropologist” for the day was shocked by how many steps went into getting their son ready for school: waking him up; getting him dressed; convincing him to get his shoes on; tying his shoes; and packing his backpack, his lunch, his warm jacket and mittens. He hadn’t realized the job was as demanding as it was, and he had a new appreciation for his wife’s efforts every morning.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">You don’t have to hide the fact that you’re spying—this doesn’t have to be <i class="Box_ITAL">Mission: Impossible</i>. You can tell your partner you’re observing them to get a better sense of their day, and everything they do. Their behavior isn’t going to change much just by knowing you’re watching. If you’re doing this together, take turns—you be the observer for a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_58" role="doc-pagebreak" title="58"/>while, then switch roles. Look for the things you might not be able to see easily, because of conflicting schedules or distractions. Use X-ray vision to see everything your partner does, no matter how small and routine. And as you watch, go beyond the basics of tasks and errands. Observe how your partner conveys affection when they interact with the kids and others. The to-do lists of life are long and never-ending, and they automatically replenish themselves every day. There will always be something more to do; something not done. Is your partner spending time interacting with your children, talking on the phone with aging parents, supporting colleagues, connecting with friends? Notice how your partner shows kindness, generosity, and encouragement, and the ways that they invest in relationships. This is time well spent.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step Two: Say thank you.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Say thank you for something routine. If you’ve been observing your partner closely, you’ll have a lot of opportunities to do so. Thank them for something they’re doing right, even if it’s small, even if they do it every day—in fact, <i class="Box_ITAL">especially</i> if it’s small and they do it every day! But don’t just say “Hey, thanks.” Tell them why this small thing is a big deal to you. “Thank you for making the coffee every morning. I love waking up to the smell of coffee and the sounds of you puttering away in the kitchen. It just makes me start the day off right.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_59" role="doc-pagebreak" title="59"/>Gratitude: it’s good for your health, and good for your relationship. With one thank-you, you begin to build (or continue to strengthen) your culture of appreciation. It’s one of the top skills employed by the masters of love and longevity.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B-No-Space">If you’re crunched for time . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">If you can’t play hooky from work, or carve out a few hours, don’t worry—you can still gather some good data on your partner using other tactics.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text"><i class="Box_BOLD_ITAL">Trade roles.</i> If you’re always the one who gets the kids off to school, have your partner do it today instead. If he or she is always the one to make dinner, you do it tonight. You two might even make a quick list of everything you each do, then pick a couple of things to flip-flop on. See what it feels like to put yourself in each other’s shoes.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text"><i class="Box_BOLD_ITAL">Observe each other during mealtime.</i> Mealtimes are a good touch point during the day to observe each other. Notice what your partner does before, during, and after mealtime, whether it’s prep, cleanup, or other tasks involving the house, kids, bills, and so on. John always notices how much Julie packs into her post-breakfast time before work—while he’s finishing his breakfast, she’s sweeping the deck, watering the plants, filling the bird feeder. Any meal that you share together during a busy day can be a good, concentrated time to “spy” on your partner.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_60" role="doc-pagebreak" title="60"/>If you’re having trouble getting out of the negative perspective . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Take a look at your past. Sometimes, when people have had crappy caretakers, they’ll merge together what their caretaker did and what their partner is doing now. Without meaning to, they’ll superimpose these feelings onto their partner—it’s like the ghost of this parent or caretaker is there, getting in the way.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">What to do about it? Try to separate out the negative feelings about that past relationship by being in the <i class="Box_ITAL">here and now</i>. Try to notice if you’re mentally traveling back in time, making assumptions and resurrecting old feelings. We mentioned mindfulness meditation as a way to change the brain—this can help here. Focus on this specific moment, this specific person, what you can tangibly observe. Ask yourself: <i class="Box_ITAL">Have I had these negative feelings before this relationship ever began? Who with? What set off those feelings?</i> Identifying, naming, and sourcing these types of negative thoughts and feelings can help you let them go.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">If it feels like you’re seeing the positive, but your partner is not . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Remember: You’re changing you <i class="Box_ITAL">own</i> mind and mental habits when you do this. You’re not changing your partner. Ultimately, how they think and feel is not in your control. But changing your own way of looking at the world is powerful. You’re disrupting the cycle of negativity—you’re <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_61" role="doc-pagebreak" title="61"/>refusing to feed it or give it any fuel to continue—and that is so important.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">If you still have pervasive negative feelings . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">You might be dealing with depression. People who are depressed have a brain-generated mountain of negative thoughts and feelings, not only about themselves but also about others. It’s extremely hard for them to reach up and grasp their positive thoughts and feelings about their world and the people in it. If you’re really having trouble finding your positive perspective, or you notice your partner is struggling to do so, the real struggle may be with depression.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Depression can be helped by medication and effective psychotherapy. If you think depression is the “third party” in your relationship, seek professional advice from your family doctor, who may refer you to a psychiatrist or psychotherapist especially trained to help you. And don’t worry, you won’t be alone. Recent data indicates that at least 9.5 percent of Americans regularly experience some degree of depression;<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber12" id="SuperscriptNumber12" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[6]</a> however, during the COVID-19 pandemic that number tripled, rocketing up to 32.8 percent.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber13" id="SuperscriptNumber13" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[7]</a> And after all, if you are struggling with depression, why should you just continue to suffer when good help is available? Professional assistance can help both you and your relationship. You won’t be sorry you reached <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_62" role="doc-pagebreak" title="62"/>out.</p>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>