<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 4: Give a Real Compliment, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-14">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-15"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_63" role="doc-pagebreak" title="63"/>DAY 4</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-16">GIVE A REAL COMPLIMENT</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Molly and Caroline met in the mountains. They were fresh out of college, young and ready for adventure. They’d each applied to AmeriCorps and had ended up working for the US Forest Service on the same trail crew. Hiking into the North Cascades in Washington State, they would haul heavy tools for clearing fallen trees and rebuilding trails, and would even sleep out under the stars when it was clear. One day on the trail, Molly and Caroline ended up working side by side and fell into conversation. It was a hard day of work, but the hours dissolved as they talked about movies they’d both loved, places they’d traveled, places they wanted to go, their pasts and their imagined futures. It was one of those conversations that started light and fun but got deep <i>fast</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Fast-forward ten years: Molly and Caroline are married. They don’t work in the mountains anymore, lacing up hiking boots and hauling chain saws—they’ve settled into careers in environmental activism. It doesn’t pay much, and the setbacks can be <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_64" role="doc-pagebreak" title="64"/>crushing, but they both love what they do. A few years ago, they managed to buy a house in north Seattle, a lovely little Craftsman in a tight-knit, walkable neighborhood that’s close enough to downtown that they can bike to work, and close enough to the mountains that they can drive out for a hike on the weekends at the drop of a hat. They turned their small square of front lawn into an efficient little garden, building raised beds out of cedar planks. But the city has been growing more and more expensive, and financial pressures weigh heavily on them. They don’t travel as much as they once thought they would—in fact, barely at all. They’ve been talking about starting a family, but the costs associated with it are scarily high. Molly thinks they should leave the city and move out to someplace cheaper and wilder; they can find new jobs and embark upon a whole new adventure! But Caroline likes their house, their garden, their life. She likes her job. She likes things as they are.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we started working with them, they were locked in a feedback loop of resentment and defensiveness, each staking out her own territory and deflecting what she saw as an attack on her own needs and desires. And <i>everything</i> felt like an attack. It was impossible for either of them to bring up a topic for discussion without the conversation immediately devolving into a micro-war. When Molly brought up having a baby during one of our sessions, Caroline immediately tensed.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“I think you’re just restless,” she said. “You always want to just get to the next thing. Why can’t you just sit still? Why can’t what we have be good enough for you?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_65" role="doc-pagebreak" title="65"/>“This is what we talked about, Caroline. We always said we would have kids when the time was right. We’re going to miss our chance. You can’t drag your feet on everything and expect me to wait around for you.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They were starting to lob the kinds of criticisms that can corrode a relationship—the kind that eat through fondness and friendship like rust through metal. But they were in our office for a reason: They wanted to fight for the relationship. They wanted to find a way forward. They’d fallen in love working side by side, blazing trails into the wilderness, but now they couldn’t forge even the thinnest path together.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We asked them a question that is one of the clearest litmus tests of any relationship: “Tell us how you met.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And they did. They each told versions of their story, which they remembered vividly. We heard about uncomfortable nights on the rocky ground, holding hands secretly in the dark from two separate sleeping bags. Even in the midst of their ongoing conflict, they easily answered the question: “Why did you fall in love with her?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Caroline: “She was so bold and adventurous. She was always at the front of the group, leading us to the next job, tackling the hardest tasks. She seemed up for anything.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Molly: “She really listened when I talked. She was so thoughtful. She was always so patient and steady—it was like landing on solid ground after being at sea.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It was easy to see that within their current struggles, there were qualities that they deeply appreciated and admired about <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_66" role="doc-pagebreak" title="66"/>the other. And they were able to access those feelings of fondness and admiration—it was right at the tips of their tongues. They were going through a tough time with some big decisions looming, but we already knew they were going to be OK.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It wasn’t just a hunch: Data from the three thousand couples we followed, some for as long as two decades, in the Love Lab showed that couples who stay happily together are easily able to name specific qualities they love and appreciate about their partner. They have vivid memories of their past together. When they describe that shared history, their narrative is an overwhelmingly positive one—they emphasize the good times and the upsides.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber14" id="SuperscriptNumber14" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">There will always be conflict in any relationship, no matter how solid the partnership, no matter how deep the intimacy. We now know that the majority of problems couples face are <i>perpetual</i> problems—they are not solvable. They can’t be fixed. But couples who take the time every day to notice and hold in mind what they admire about the person they’ve chosen to weather the slings and arrows of life with are the ones who succeed long term. Admiration isn’t something that just happens—it’s something you <i>do</i>. Actively admiring the other person—appreciating them not just for what they do, but for <i>who they are</i>—is like air in a life raft: you float above the waves, even when they get rough.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Why Did <i class="_5-Head-A-ITAL">You</i> Fall in Love with Your Partner?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Think back to the beginning, whether it was months ago, years ago, or decades ago. Recall the moment you met. The moment you thought, <i>I want to get to know this person better</i>. The <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_67" role="doc-pagebreak" title="67"/>moment you decided that you wanted to be together long term and make a life together. What were the qualities that drew you to them initially? What excited you about this person? What did you admire about them? When you pictured a life with them, what was it that you valued in them? Who were they to you?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We could fill a book with the origin stories we’ve heard over the years: <i>It was the sound of her laugh from across the room, cutting through the crowded party—her joy was contagious.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>It was the way he talked to children, before we had any of our own—I knew I wanted to be a parent with him.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>She was so authentic and unafraid to be herself. She obviously didn’t care what anybody else thought.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>He was so fun to talk to. We talked so long on our first date, they had to kick us out of the restaurant.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Now, if we were to ask these same people about their partner’s flaws, they’d surely be able to come up with a laundry list of grievances (in fact, many of the above comments came from people who were, like Molly and Caroline, in our office because they were having a really tough time). Nobody’s perfect. Each of us is our own unique bundle of good qualities and . . . well, not so good qualities. It’s what makes us human. And frankly, it’s what makes us lovable—we love each other <i>because</i> of our idiosyncrasies, not in spite of them. But when you’re living together, raising children together, maybe even working together (as we’ve been doing for the past thirty-three years!), and trying to keep afloat in the messy chaos of life, it can be hard to remember that. Someone’s habit of forgetting to move the laundry to the dryer before it mildews, or their inability to notice that the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_68" role="doc-pagebreak" title="68"/>bathroom is falling into a state of horrifying disrepair, can start to seem not so lovable at all.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">As we talked about in the last chapter, when we start looking at each other through a negative lens, we can find a <i>lot</i> to be critical about. And that negative perspective doesn’t stop with what your partner is <i>doing</i> right or wrong. It can infect how you think about them as a person. <i>He never cleans the car</i> becomes <i>he’s lazy and sloppy</i>. <i>She avoids my mother</i> becomes <i>she’s antisocial and judgmental</i>. This way of thinking about each other leaves the door wide open to those relationship killers, the Four Horsemen: criticism, defensiveness, stonewalling, and, perhaps most destructive of all, <i>contempt</i>. Contempt, which emerges from a pattern of negative thinking and criticism of your partner, is deadly poison for a relationship. It’s the number one predictor of divorce.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber15" id="SuperscriptNumber15" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> It impacts the mental health of both partners.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber16" id="SuperscriptNumber16" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[3]</a> And it can literally make you sick: studies found that partners who heard their partner’s contempt for them were significantly more likely to catch colds, flus, and other infectious illnesses in the coming year.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber17" id="SuperscriptNumber17" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[4]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The good news? There’s an antidote for this. We have more control over how we see each other than we might think, even through tough times, stress, setbacks, disagreements, or periods of disconnect. Like scanning for the positive instead of for the negative (as we discussed in the last chapter), this is a habit of mind that we can cultivate simply by practicing it, in small ways, every day.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The masters of love don’t have fewer flaws than the rest of us. They don’t sail through life without ever running into challenges <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_69" role="doc-pagebreak" title="69"/>or conflict, never getting annoyed with how their partner chews or never getting frustrated that their partner isn’t better at managing money. They have just as many foibles and imperfections as the rest of us. But what they’re <i>great</i> at is seeing their partner’s innate good qualities. They are highly skilled at holding—in the front of their minds—what they admire about their chosen person. And that becomes impenetrable armor against the forces that break down a relationship.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">The Math Equation That Makes You or Breaks You</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Here’s a statistic from the Love Lab that everybody needs to know: <i>five to one</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That’s the ratio of positive to negative interactions <i>during a conflict</i> that you need to have in order to keep love alive over time. For every one single negative interaction, you’ll need five positive ones to make up for it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We discovered this in one of our first big longitudinal studies in the Love Lab: When couples came in, we sat them down, made them comfortable, and then gave them fifteen minutes to resolve a disagreement while we sat back and watched. Later, we pored over their recordings and transcripts and logged every little moment, categorizing each one—a smile, a little joke, touching the other person’s hand, expressing empathy and interest, saying “I understand,” nodding their heads, being kind: these were all <i>positive</i>. A nasty remark, raising their voices, snapping, criticizing, blaming, acting disinterested: these were <i>negative</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We watched the couples, logged the data, then released them <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_70" role="doc-pagebreak" title="70"/>back into the wild. Six years later, we followed up. And lo and behold: it was the couples who had maintained at <i>least</i> a five-to-one ratio (or more!) during conflict who were still happily together, still feeling the love.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber18" id="SuperscriptNumber18" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[5]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Negativity will happen during conflict. These couples weren’t perfect. And that’s OK—we’re all only human. We all make mistakes and take stuff out on our nearest and dearest. We can be unfair. We lose perspective. We get caught up in the heat of the moment. We say something we don’t mean, or in a way we wish we hadn’t. And we don’t need to be emotionless or polite, or avoid tough conversations. But we do need to check on our positivity meter, to make sure it’s accumulating enough positives. Negativity can be a potent poison. Negativity has much more power to inflict damage and cause pain than positivity does to heal and bring you closer. That’s why we need <i>five times</i> more positives than negatives during conflict. But know this: you <i>can</i> win the war against negativity. You can “fill up your glass” with positive interactions so that when there <i>is</i> a drop of negativity, it’s diluted. It loses its potency.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Now, a critical caveat—we’ve been talking about the minimum ratio of positive to negative interactions <i>during conflict</i>. What about the rest of the time?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That ratio jumps . . . to <i>twenty to one</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In your typical, everyday life, as you and your partner are going about your business—cooking meals, negotiating chores, parenting your kids, chatting about your day—you’ll need, at a minimum, <i>twenty</i> positive interactions for each negative one. The masters of love maintained that twenty-to-one ratio, and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_71" role="doc-pagebreak" title="71"/>more. The couples who were headed for divorce or unhappiness showed a skewed ratio, with that number ticking up on the negativity side.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber19" id="SuperscriptNumber19" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[6]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">So why does this happen? Well, often, we aren’t even aware of our negative impact on our partners.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Does Your <i class="_5-Head-A-ITAL">Intent</i> Match Your <i class="_5-Head-A-ITAL">Impact</i>?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">One of the first ways that we “coded” interactions between couples, in order to find behavior patterns to compare unhappy couples with happy ones, was through a device called “the talk table.” John and Robert Levenson (John’s first research partner) built it early on, before we launched the Love Lab in Seattle, when they were just starting out in their work looking for mathematical patterns in the love lives of human beings. It was a funny-looking table, angled on both sides and with buttons on each side, like a video game you were going to play with your partner. If you were to come into that first lab of ours with your partner as a participant, here’s how it would have gone down: You’d sit down at the table, one of you on each side, and we’d get you talking. We’d ask you a question such as: <i>What’s one of your biggest areas of continuing disagreement?</i> We’d prompt you to work on resolving it . . . and then watch.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">You’d be alone in the room, but we’d be observing from an adjacent one—cameras trained close on your faces would capture your every fleeting expression, while we watched on a split-screen TV.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In front of each of you there’d be two rows of buttons: one row <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_72" role="doc-pagebreak" title="72"/>was for <i>intent</i>, the other row was for <i>impact</i>. There were five buttons to a row, ranging from positive to negative, with neutral in the middle—picture one of those survey quizzes you have to take online about your experience shopping somewhere. The buttons range from poor to great with a few options in between. You’d take turns speaking with a light glowing on your side of the table when it was your turn; when you were done, you’d flip a switch to give your partner the floor. Each time you handed off the baton, each of you would record your experience of that small portion of the conversation. If you’d just been speaking, you’d press the button on the intent row that corresponded with how you intended to come across to your partner. Meanwhile, your partner would press the button on the impact row that best described how he or she felt in response to your comment. We wanted to know: Do people have the impact they intend to have?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we recruited couples for this experiment, we wanted to make sure we could get a really good comparison between the habits of happy couples and unhappy ones. We wanted to be able to really say something about <i>great</i> relationships and how they stood apart from the crowd. So we oversampled from the extreme ends of the spectrum: we recruited couples who were either really happy or really unhappy—nothing in between to muddy the data.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We were looking for a couple of things: Was there a mismatch between <i>intention</i> and <i>impact</i>? Did people actually have the effect on each other that they intended to have?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Here’s what we found: intentions made no difference! <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_73" role="doc-pagebreak" title="73"/>Everybody had positive intentions, even if their behavior was angry and hostile. Intention meant nothing; impact was everything. And the difference between the extremely unhappy couples and the very happy couples boiled down to one simple thing: the happy couples were kinder when they spoke to each other—they treated each other more gently, without criticism, contempt, or sarcasm. And there was a <i>dose-response relationship</i>, meaning the kinder they were to each other, the better the outcome.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Now, there was not just one profile of the kind of couple who would turn out to be happy and stay together for the long haul. Tolstoy wrote, “All happy families are alike, but every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” Unfortunately for Tolstoy, that turns out not to be scientifically true. Some successful couples were quite emotional; others not emotional at all. Some people were highly expressive, even volatile; others were like the poker-faced, severe couple from the famous painting <i>American Gothic</i>. The one thing that did not change at all was that ratio of positive to negative interactions. The happy couples were more positive, more empathetic. Again, everybody had positive <i>intentions—</i>but for happy couples, impact matched intention.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber20" id="SuperscriptNumber20" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[7]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We ran it again, this time with a different demographic: the first study had had college and grad students as participants, so the next time, we went out into a rural community in Southern Indiana. But even so, the results were essentially the same—the margin of error was only in the second decimal place.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber21" id="SuperscriptNumber21" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[8]</a> It’s a pretty stunning result, to get such a stable finding. And we were able to use these findings to observe couples and predict if they’d be happy together or not.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_74" role="doc-pagebreak" title="74"/>So we know that we need to meet this certain threshold of positive interactions. And we know that our positive intentions don’t always land. So what do we do?</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Cultivate Compassion</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">In the previous chapter, we talked about the damage that ensues if you look around and see only what’s wrong, incomplete, imperfect. Now, take that negative lens and consider how often you apply it to your partner—not just what they do (or don’t do), but <i>who they are</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Yesterday, we were focusing on gratitude, and saying thank you for specific actions. What we want to talk about here is <i>admiration</i>. Admiration is about fundamentally admiring and valuing who your partner is, not necessarily what they do. They may demonstrate who they are through their actions, sure, but admiration links back to their personality, their innate qualities—from the superficial (their gorgeous eyes!) all the way down to the deep and profound (their spirituality, their optimism, their capacity for love).</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We want to make a really important point here: this is <i>not</i> about putting on “rose-colored glasses.” It’s a common phrase, but we never use it. It implies a sort of false or deceptive positive spin, and that’s not at all what we’re talking about. We’re talking about seeing your partner fully: leaning into their wonderful qualities as well as having compassion for their <i>enduring vulnerabilities</i>. This is a term coined by Thomas Bradbury, a researcher and psychologist at UCLA, to describe the particular <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_75" role="doc-pagebreak" title="75"/>sensitivities we develop over time because of our life experiences, all the way back to childhood. Our enduring vulnerabilities are often the root cause of those qualities that our partners might not love so much about us (like insecurity, fear, quickness to anger, or tuning out when we should be tuning in), but we can live together so much better when we understand their origin.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we were first married, we had a fight that seemed to blow up out of nowhere. John was driving home from work one day and a worry popped into his head: <i>Did we ever pay that plumber?</i> It’s important to him that we promptly pay the tradespeople we hire—he knows people depend on that income and he wants to be on top of it. But maybe Julie had mailed the check. He walked in, set his coat and bag down, and said, “Hey, did you pay the plumber?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The anger on her face shocked him. “Did YOU pay the plumber?” She stormed out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">John was baffled. He remembers thinking, <i>Did I marry a lunatic?</i> Her reaction seemed so out of proportion to events. They hadn’t been married long, but if he knew one thing for sure, it was not to stew on it, and instead just go and talk to her. When they talked, Julie described coming home from school as a child, and how when she walked in the door, her mother would always first say something critical before saying hello: “Is <i>that</i> what you wore to school?” “Where’s your purse? Did you forget it <i>again</i>?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Julie told John: “When we haven’t seen each other all day, it’s important to me that you at least say hello first, that you say something kind, or maybe ask how my day went.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Once he understood, it was an easy fix to make.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_76" role="doc-pagebreak" title="76"/>Now, the first time John sees Julie after they’ve been apart, he shows that he’s really glad to see her—that he’s glad she exists.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Admiring and appreciating your partner isn’t just about seeing the good stuff. (That’s great too, and it’s what we’ll be doing in the exercise shortly.) It’s also about understanding the negative things they live with. What we see in happy, thriving relationships is that people do genuinely admire each other for all the wonderful qualities they each possess, and when it comes to the inevitable not-so-wonderful qualities, they’re able to have compassion for each other’s enduring vulnerabilities.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Some people have had really tough stuff happen that has left them with vulnerabilities and fears that make it difficult to live with them sometimes. But those of us who are partnered with people who have this kind of backstory need to remember that these people we love are survivors. They’ve had to summon up a lot of courage at certain points in their life to keep on going. And maybe they are sometimes irritable, anxious, or fearful. But they survived what they went through, and that may have scarred them.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When you look at your partner today, and every day, you can focus on their flaws, or you can focus on the qualities that make them indispensable to you, wonderful to you, attractive to you. It’s a choice. It’s an <i>active</i> thing you do to fan the flames of long-term love. If you’ve ever lit a fire, you know exactly what we mean—just like a fire, a relationship needs tending. You don’t just leave it alone and hope for the best. You tend it. You add scraps of kindling. You give it a breath of air.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That’s what admiration is—an <i>action</i> we do. That we need to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_77" role="doc-pagebreak" title="77"/>remind ourselves to do it doesn’t cheapen it or make it any less genuine. This is how the masters of love do it. To be in love for the long haul is to <i>choose</i> to see the best parts of our partners first, instead of looking for the worst.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">If this has been lacking in your relationship, one strategy is to come back to that question we asked you at the beginning of this chapter: <i>Why did you fall in love with your partner?</i> Reflecting on this question can be an amazing way to reset and regain some perspective. Reaching into your shared past and pulling up fun memories, adventurous memories, memories of connection, sexy memories—this can regenerate your innate capacity to visualize all the good in your relationship, instead of letting the good remain invisible or buried under the minutiae of daily life.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But here’s the thing: If you don’t do this consistently, the past might not be there for you when you reach back for it. When things start to go sour—when admiration fades and people forget why they like and love each other; when the negative perspective sets in—even our memories can become corrupted, like a virus in a computer file. <i>Contempt</i> sets in, which is a relationship destroyer. It will infect the foundational “code” of your relationship. What we see with the relationships that (sadly) aren’t actually salvageable is that even when these partners reach back into the past, they can no longer remember the things they once loved and admired about each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That’s why <i>small things often</i> is our prescription—because a daily micro-habit of reminding yourself of one specific reason you love and admire your partner will take you miles in terms of a lifetime of love. Part of admiration is <i>cherishing</i> what you <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_78" role="doc-pagebreak" title="78"/>have with this person, amplifying their positive qualities in your mind and minimizing the negative ones. It’s something you can do any time, even for a few minutes. Reflecting on what you cherish about your partner, and why no one on the planet could ever really replace them, is incredibly powerful. And you can double the impact of this powerful act by sharing with your partner what you cherish about them.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The capacity to admire your partner is like bulletproof armor for a relationship. Contempt is corrosive—if it gets in there, it can rapidly eat through all the good in a marriage or partnership like rust does to metal, no matter how strong and ironclad it once was. Admiration is a powerful protectant ensuring that contempt never even gets a toehold.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">The Positive Perspective: The Most Potent Antidote There Is</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">It’s quantifiable: You need roughly twenty times as much everyday positivity as there is negativity between you and your partner. An amazing way to create positivity is to admire your partner, and then say it out loud. In a jam-packed day, it’s possible to just let the real stuff of life slip away—so take a few moments to regard this human you’re going through life with and remember, <i>Oh yeah, I really love the way she comes home every day so jazzed to tell me about her work</i>. Don’t let those thoughts and feelings pass without sharing them with your partner. Grab on to them; hand them to your partner like a tiny gift. It’s a gift for you, too.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Affection, respect, and friendship are the foundation of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_79" role="doc-pagebreak" title="79"/>everything else in a marriage or any long-term relationship, from how fiery your sex life is to how you can effectively navigate a thorny discussion about finances. But it doesn’t “just happen.” It comes from intention. From action. From choice. You choose, every day, to perform these small actions that fill up your emotional bank account. You make time to check in. You stay curious: <i>What don’t I know about her? What’s his day been like?</i> You keep a lookout for bids for connection and you turn toward whenever you can, because now you know that even the most fleeting of engagements—a smile, an encouraging phrase, a follow-up question that communicates <i>I’m listening; I care about what you’re saying</i>—are all money in the bank. You retrain that squirrelly human brain of yours to scan for the positive instead of the negative, reprogramming your neurons to notice what’s <i>right</i> instead of what’s <i>wrong</i>, which has trickle-down effects throughout your brain, body, relationship, and experience of life. And you make it a top priority to hold in the front of your mind the things you love and admire about your partner. Not just the things they <i>do</i> for you, but <i>who they are</i> fundamentally.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>