<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-15">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_80" role="doc-pagebreak" title="80"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">GIVE YOUR PARTNER A GENUINE COMPLIMENT</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Today’s action is essential whether you have a thriving culture of admiration between you and your partner or whether your relationship needs some serious rehabilitation. If this is an area of strength for you, <i class="Box_ITAL">wonderful</i>. Let’s keep that fire well fed.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">For some couples (and if this includes you, you aren’t alone), fondness and admiration seem like distant memories. That doesn’t mean they aren’t still there, waiting to be called back to life. Reviving admiration is not complicated. You fell in love with this person and committed yourself to them; you come to these pages with a desire for that love to go on. You have positive feelings in there. Thinking about them and talking about them will bring them back to life more quickly and vividly than you might imagine. A plant that is wilting away often needs just a splash of water to leap back up toward the sun. A little bit goes a long way.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Today’s exercise has three parts:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step One: If you were to paint a verbal portrait of your partner in words, which words would you choose? Circle three to five choices:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-UNL-Para">Warm / Funny / Generous / Calm / Creative / Passionate / Intense / Vivacious / Thoughtful / Spontaneous / <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_81" role="doc-pagebreak" title="81"/>Adventurous / Fun-loving / Playful / Astute / Perceptive / Nurturing / Sexy / Intelligent / Talented / Affectionate / Competent / Charming / Wise / Loving / Considerate / Attractive / Dependable / Flexible / Supportive / Curious / Interesting / Kind / Brave / Open / Easygoing / Sensitive</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step Two: Today, anytime you are together, notice the ways your partner embodies those qualities you circled above.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">As you did yesterday, closely observe your partner when you’re with them. Notice when they are demonstrating those qualities you love and appreciate. And then . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step Three: Express it!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">How often do you communicate to your partner the core, essential things you love and appreciate about them? Do it more, because every time counts!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B-No-Space">Not much time to observe each other today?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Look at the words you circled above, and think of a time you can recall when your partner embodied one of those qualities. It could be from yesterday or a decade ago. It could be something huge (<i class="Box_ITAL">You were supportive when you moved across the country with me for my dream job</i>) or something small (<i class="Box_ITAL">You were really sexy in those jeans you wore yesterday!</i>). See if you can think of something specific for <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_82" role="doc-pagebreak" title="82"/>each of the three things. Then share with each other what memories came to mind. You may be surprised at the things your partner notices and appreciates about you, and vice versa.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">Feeling shy or hesitant?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Write it down! Do the above activity (take the three words you circled, then think of three incidents that illustrate those qualities) and write it out as a journal activity. Write it like a letter, addressed to your partner. <i class="Box_ITAL">You showed me how loyal you are when you . . . The first time I realized how adventurous you are was when you . . .</i></p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">When you’re done, read your list to your partner—out loud! When we run this activity with couples in workshops, it’s amazing the shift that happens in the room. It’s irresistible. People break out into smiles and laughter. People who came in hesitant or self-conscious relax and warm up. The body language between couples changes noticeably. Even for people who came in unhappy or worried, you can see it again: that spark.</p>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>