<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 5: Ask for What You Need, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-16">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-17"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_83" role="doc-pagebreak" title="83"/>DAY 5</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-18">ASK FOR WHAT YOU NEED</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Jake was upset. It had been weeks since he and his partner, Miriam, had sat down to dinner together. And yet again, it was late in the evening and she was still at work. She’d texted, as she had so many nights, to say that she wouldn’t be making it home for dinner. <i>Go ahead and eat without me, sweetie</i>, she’d typed. <i>I’ll be at the studio late tonight!</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">He understood. At least, he <i>had</i>, until recently. Miriam, an artist who did mixed-media sculptures, had gotten a big break: a gallery show at the university where she taught. She had been working hard to get ready for the show. But it was still months away. Meanwhile, Jake had a lot on his plate, too. After years of working in land use law for a firm that sucked up every spare minute of his time, he’d launched his own firm out of his living room. He loved being his own boss. There was still a lot to do, and now he had to handle everything himself, but his time was his own again. He could go for a bike ride on a beautiful day if <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_84" role="doc-pagebreak" title="84"/>he wanted, and make up the hours late at night. It was great. But lately it felt lonely—Miriam was never around, no matter when he took his time off. She’d always been supportive of him, all those years when he had to work crazy hours and pay his dues, and he wanted to be just as supportive now that she was in the make-or-break moment of her career. But several times in the past week alone, she’d brushed off his requests to spend time together, and he was starting to feel like he was the last thing on her to-do list. They were both driven, ambitious people, and they’d always been proud of how they lifted each other up professionally, how accommodating and understanding they were when the other had to make a big push. But before, it had always felt like the relationship came first. It didn’t feel like that anymore. Maybe he wasn’t as important to her as he thought. Maybe their marriage wasn’t something she needed, now that she was ascending in the professional realm.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When Miriam did finally arrive home, late, Jake was wound tight as a wire.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“You know, you could have taken an hour off tonight, for once,” he said. “I was really looking forward to dinner tonight. I went out and got your favorite—steamed clams.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“You did?” Miriam was surprised. “I had no idea. We’ve just been doing takeout and stuff lately, since we’ve both been so busy.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“I asked you yesterday if you wanted to come home for dinner, and you said yes!”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Well of course I said that I <i>wanted</i> to! I thought maybe if I <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_85" role="doc-pagebreak" title="85"/>got enough done this afternoon after class, I’d be able to. I just can’t right now, Jake. I have so much to do for the opening. I’m not ready at all. I thought you understood. I thought we were on the same page.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“OK. I know. I get that. I just thought that if I invited you to have dinner with me just <i>once</i> in an entire month, you’d make it happen. That is, if our relationship is still important to you.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Of <i>course</i> our relationship is still important to me! Where on earth is this coming from?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>Pause</i>. What’s the problem here? Let’s do an X-ray of this argument. Miriam thinks the two of them are “on the same page” about both being in an “all work and no play” phase. Jake thinks he invited Miriam to a date night dinner and she blew him off. If we rewind to the day before, this is what we’d see: Miriam packing a bag for the long day ahead as Jake talks about how things are going at the new law firm of “Jake and Miriam’s Living Room” (he’s still brainstorming names for his new firm)—it’s going great, but he misses the way they used to meet up for dinner at different restaurants in the city after a long day at their respective offices. It was such a wonderful way to end the day—it really felt like he could leave everything back at the office when he’d walk into a crowded bar and see her sitting there with two glasses of wine, waiting for him.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“It would be nice to do that again,” he says.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Definitely,” Miriam replies.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Maybe we could do something tomorrow night,” Jake says. “We could stay in, I’ll cook!”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_86" role="doc-pagebreak" title="86"/>“Sure, maybe!” Miriam replies. “Text me later. I have to run.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">She kisses him and is out the door.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In this interaction, Jake and Miriam are having two completely separate conversations. It’s almost like they’re speaking two different languages—each thinking they understand the other, while the real meaning is lost. Jake believes he has expressed himself; he misses the dinners they used to have before their lives changed. That time specially reserved for just for the two of them was invaluable to him. He needs it, and feels disconnected from her without it. He knows that her work is important (his is, too!) and they’re both busier than they’ve ever been, but he needs her to carve out an hour just for him, so that he doesn’t feel like they’re two boats drifting away from each other in a strong current. Hey, maybe making that time would even be helpful for both of them, even if it takes time away from work. Talking about their passion projects has always been a way for them to not only connect intimately with each other, but also support each other in those pursuits.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The problem is, Jake hasn’t actually <i>asked</i> her.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Your partner isn’t a mind reader. We all know this. And yet, what we see from so many couples is that we behave as if they were. We want our partners to pick up on little hints and signals about what we need and desire—or to just know. Jake dropped about a million hints, to clue Miriam in to how urgently he wanted to spend time with her. But his actual request was off-the-cuff casual. <i>Maybe we could do something tomorrow night.</i> Then he heard her “sure,” but not her “maybe.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Miriam didn’t realize what was being asked of her. She failed <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_87" role="doc-pagebreak" title="87"/>to fulfill Jake’s desire. And when she didn’t show up, he felt hurt, ignored, and resentful. The only explanation he could come up with was that he didn’t matter to her as much as her work. And she felt surprised and annoyed when he was upset with her for not showing up. After all, she hadn’t committed to anything. She’d only said “maybe.” Perhaps if he’d expressed his need more clearly, she could have responded more clearly.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When you sit and stew on what your partner isn’t doing, it can plant a seed of resentment that spreads like a weed. Resentment is hard to rip out once it’s widespread—it’s much harder to eradicate it than it is to prevent it from taking hold in the first place. But either way, the antidote is the same: you have to tell your partner what you need and want. But asking for what you need isn’t always easy.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Why Does It Feel So Hard?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We’ve been taught that needs are bad. Needs are a weakness. We’ve been socially conditioned not to acknowledge our own needs, and even if we do, not to announce them. Women are taught, <i>Don’t be too needy</i>. Men are taught, <i>You should be tough and strong and NOT have needs</i>. Both of these cultural messages are rooted in what we are taught is attractive and acceptable; what’s feminine and what’s masculine, and depending on our gender, what we should embody.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">As fiercely as we may push back against these stereotypes, they continue to wield power over us even today. This is the cultural water we swim in; we absorb some of this messaging, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_88" role="doc-pagebreak" title="88"/>no matter how hard we try to detox from it. Women have been trained to be nurturers—to satisfy the needs of others. But what happens to their needs? Men have been trained to be providers—to be strong, to not need help. But what happens to their needs?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Many of us have had our needs or requests ignored early in life, no matter what our gender is, which ingrains the belief that our needs aren’t important or valid. So we are all moving through life with these subterranean needs and desires, suppressing instead of expressing them. And the trouble is, they find a way to rear their furry little heads, no matter how much we push them down. They’ll shape our emotions and constrain our thinking. They’ll influence our actions in ways that we might not be aware of. Suppressed needs can flare up into resentments and arguments when the unmet need simply becomes too much to keep inside—as we saw with Jake and Miriam.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We tiptoe around our needs instead of stating them outright because it feels safer. It can be nerve-racking to be so vulnerable—even with your partner. It can feel scary. If you ask someone for something, there’s a chance they’ll say no. At some point in our lives, we’ve all been shot down. And that can feel pretty bad. It can be hurtful and humiliating to say what you need or want and then be rejected. We’ll do anything to avoid feeling that way—to the point where we’ll avoid asking our partners directly for the simplest of things: <i>I’d love it if you could make time to have dinner with me</i> tonight<i>. I really need to spend some time with you—even just an hour. Can you make it work?</i> We prefer to hint and maneuver, hoping that the stars align, that our partners intuit our <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_89" role="doc-pagebreak" title="89"/>desires, and that we get what we most want without having to expose ourselves.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we have had our needs ignored early in life, it teaches us one of two things:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-First" role="listitem">1. We’re not worthy of having our needs met, or</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Last" role="listitem">2. Needs are weak and bad.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We need to overturn this and flip the script. We are all worthy of asking for and receiving what we need. And needs are not a sign of weakness. Needs are normal, healthy, and human. They are as natural as breathing. They are like oxygen. Your physical and emotional needs are just as essential to your life and well-being as the food you eat, water you drink, and air you breathe. And so are your desires! We are often much too rigid about what we categorize as a need. You may ask yourself: <i>Is it a want or a need?</i> Our answer: It doesn’t matter! We have a misconception that wants are not as valid as needs. Wants, we’ve internalized, mean you’re greedy or selfish. <i>Not true.</i> Wants and needs exist across a nuanced range, and like colors across the light spectrum, there are almost infinite possibilities—from yellows to reds to blues to violets and from our most urgent needs to our deepest desires. They are all valid. And they should be expressed—especially to your partner.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s OK to say what you want and need.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In fact, it’s more than OK. It’s <i>essential</i>.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_90" role="doc-pagebreak" title="90"/>Where We Go Wrong</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Here’s what happens in distressed relationships, over and over: We all have needs. We all have valid desires. But we don’t say them. We drop hints. We suggest. We stay safely in the shadows. We hope our partners will “just know.” We tell ourselves a story about why they should be able to figure it out without us having to say it (“It’s obvious! It’s just common sense!”), and we believe it. Then, when our partners fail to magically fulfill those needs, we feel resentful. We begin to believe that our partners don’t care, are thinking only about themselves, are too busy for us, or no longer value the relationship as they once did. And so we criticize them.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>You always.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>You never.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">These red flag phrases alert us that a couple is in shaky territory: the negative perspective might be starting to set in. They’re scanning for what’s wrong, and losing the capacity to notice what’s right. And the end result is criticism, which is when we take aim at <i>who someone fundamentally is</i>, instead of distinguishing between the person and the action. Example: “I wish you wouldn’t leave your socks on the living room floor” becomes “You are such a slob. You always leave your stuff all over the house. You never help me clean up.” Even though these last two sentences don’t include direct criticism, words like <i>always</i> and <i>never</i> are criticisms because they imply a personality flaw. After all, if “you always” do something wrong or “never” do something right, there must be something bad about you, right?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_91" role="doc-pagebreak" title="91"/>If we do manage to state our needs, we often feel we have to justify them by pointing out a deficit—something the other person isn’t doing for us, or is lacking. We’ve been taught we shouldn’t have needs, so the urge to justify is hard to overcome. “Because of your diet, I haven’t been able to eat my favorite foods, so I’m going out to eat tonight!” This comes out as a criticism of the other person (“because of <i>your</i> diet”) when this partner could have simply said, “I’d love to eat out tonight. I’m tired and could use a treat.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we store up resentment and criticism instead of just asking for what we need, at some point, the dam has to break. It’s like a reservoir of bad feelings, getting fuller and fuller, until all it takes is one little jostle and the whole thing comes crashing down. The tiniest thing can set it off; a minor disagreement suddenly becomes World War III. We call this “sandbagging”: you pile up all your resentments, and then you ambush your partner with them. “Jim, we need to have a talk. You’re a terrible father, you’re awful in bed, and the worst thing about you is, you <i>don’t recycle</i>!”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we haven’t asked clearly for what we need, criticism becomes a last line of defense. But it’s not effective. Quite the opposite. People will use the phrase “constructive criticism”—it’s a myth. There’s no such thing as constructive criticism—criticism is always <i>destructive</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">All of this can be headed off with one simple fix: <i>Ask for what you need.</i></p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_92" role="doc-pagebreak" title="92"/>Let Your Partner Shine for You</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Remember: you don’t need to justify a need. And never use criticism to frame your needs. It’s a tactic we all tend to fall back on: we justify our own needs by first pointing out what’s wrong with our partner’s behavior. The logic is that if we’ve been wronged, then it’s only fair to state our need or make a demand. The first healthy action you can take is to is <i>unlock yourself from this mindset</i>. You don’t need to find a problem in order to justify your needs or wants.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">If your partner feels attacked or criticized by you, you’re not likely to get very far. It’s not great for either of you to criticize, in fact; you sabotage yourself from being listened to and having your needs fulfilled before you’ve even begun. This doesn’t mean you need to sweet-talk or manipulate your partner. But it does mean you need to be honest, clear, and proactive instead of <i>re</i>active.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">How do we do this effectively? Just follow this simple template:</p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Para-First" role="listitem"><b><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_93" role="doc-pagebreak" title="93"/>First: Always describe yourself—not your partner.</b> Don’t ask for what you need by telling your partner what they’re doing wrong. Don’t even start by talking about your partner at all! This is about <i class="Box_ITAL">you</i>, not them.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Para" role="listitem"><b>Second: Describe the situation you’re upset about—not your partner’s personality flaws.</b> Talk about the events or circumstances that are bothering you or that you want to be different. This can allow your partner to <i class="Box_ITAL">help</i> you in improving those conditions, instead of feeling defensive and attacked.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Para-Last" role="listitem"><b class="Box_BOLD">Third: State your positive</b> <i class="Box_BOLD_ITAL">need</i><b>.</b> What can your partner do for you to make you feel better? Be specific. Be clear. And keep it positive! Don’t point out what your partner is doing wrong, or what they’re <i class="Box_ITAL">not</i> doing right. It’s too easy to veer into criticism here. Instead, think of your request as an opportunity for your partner to do something right for you that you will really appreciate. <i class="Box_ITAL">Tell your partner how to shine for you</i><i>.</i></p>
			</div>
			<h2 class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Head">Here are some examples of the wrong way versus the right way to say things:</h2>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered" role="listitem"><i class="_7-List-Unnumbered-BOLD-ITAL-Run-In">Don’t say:</i> “You never make time for me anymore. Obviously you couldn’t care less about our relationship.”</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered" role="listitem"><i class="_7-List-Unnumbered-BOLD-ITAL-Run-In">Do say:</i> “I feel lonely [your feeling] when we go this long without really spending quality time with each other [the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_94" role="doc-pagebreak" title="94"/>situation]. Can we find some time to just be together?” [your positive need]</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered" role="listitem"><i class="_7-List-Unnumbered-BOLD-ITAL-Run-In">Don’t say:</i> “You always leave the kitchen such a mess. What a slob you are! Don’t you think I want to relax at the end of the night, too?”</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered" role="listitem"><i class="_7-List-Unnumbered-BOLD-ITAL-Run-In">Do say:</i> “I feel overwhelmed lately [your feeling] by all there is to do around the house [the situation]. Could you take over the dishes or laundry this week?” [your positive need]</p>
			</div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Flip the Script!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Let’s take a look at a couple of scenarios, and how we can flip the script.</p>
				<div role="list">
					<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Para-1P" role="listitem"><b class="Box_BOLD">Scenario 1:</b> Your mother-in-law is coming over for dinner tonight, and she always finds something to criticize you about. (<i class="Box_ITAL">The dinner is late. Your kids get too much screen time. Did you have to buy a new car, in this economy?</i>) You want your partner to stick up for you this time—last time, it felt like you were just hung out to dry.</p>
				</div>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">You say:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-NL-1P">a. “Your mother is a wart on the backside of humanity! You always take her side. I guess you must have the same bad opinion of me that she does.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_95" role="doc-pagebreak" title="95"/>Now flip it!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-NL-First">a. “You know, I’m feeling anxious about your mother visiting tonight. She always seems to find something to criticize me about. Would you stick up for me tonight if she starts it? It would mean a lot.”</p>
				<div role="list">
					<p class="x07-List-Unnumbered-Para-1P" role="listitem"><b class="Box_BOLD">Scenario 2:</b> You’ve been cooking dinner every night for the past decade. It’s getting old! You want your partner to do something different tonight. You don’t have a big budget for eating out, so it’s usually only a special occasion kind of thing. But it really feels like you’re being taken for granted. And you just want a break.</p>
				</div>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">You say:</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-NL-1P">a. “I guess you’re too cheap to take me out to dinner.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Flip it!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-NL-1P">a. “I’m tired of cooking. And it’s been a long time since we had an excuse to go out. Let’s go out tonight!”</p>
			</aside>
			<p class="x04-Space-Break">It’s simple. It’s straightforward. And the beauty is, it works.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we watch a couple start a conversation, we can accurately predict how that discussion will go. Will it be productive? <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_96" role="doc-pagebreak" title="96"/>Will both people feel heard? Will the couple be kind to each other, even if they disagree? Will they reach a satisfying resolution? Or will there be acrimony, destructive criticism, defensiveness, and attacks? Ninety-six percent of the time, the outcome of not only the conversation but also the relationship six years down the line can be predicted by looking at these <i>first three minutes</i>.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber22" id="SuperscriptNumber22" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">How you start a conversation matters. No matter how legitimate your need, if you begin with a harsh start- up (a criticism, or a “you always” or “you never” statement), you’re putting yourself (and your partner!) at a huge disadvantage: not only will neither of you get what you want or need, but you may do damage to your relationship—especially if the harsh start-up becomes a habit. The alternative that we call “softened start-up” is an enormously helpful tool. How you start a conversation sets the tone for how you finish it. Begin without criticism. With compassion. Think about what your partner needs to hear in order to really listen to what you need and hopefully respond in a positive way. In a six-year longitudinal study, we found that the way couples began a problem-solving conversation was a huge predictor of whether or not they would stay happily partnered six years later.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">So what happened with Miriam and Jake? Well, they’re doing just fine. When they talked about it, Miriam discovered that Jake had been hesitant to ask her specifically to take time off work because he had a long history of being burned in that department. Growing up, his father often chose work over spending time with Jake or showing up at his events, even when he promised, even when Jake begged him to come. With every <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_97" role="doc-pagebreak" title="97"/>no-show, he’d felt crushed. And so he’d stopped putting himself out there. If he didn’t ask, he wouldn’t have to feel let down. He wouldn’t have to feel like he was a low priority for someone he loved.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Of course, he <i>did</i> feel let down anyway—but he hadn’t even given Miriam the chance to show up for him. In the end, it wasn’t hard for her to rearrange things to make time for a couple of evenings a week when she put down her sculpting tools and came home for dinner, even during the busy run-up to her gallery opening. All she’d needed to know was how important it was.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">“Are You Available?”</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Timing matters. If you’re going to talk to your partner about something important to you, you might feel brushed off or ignored if they aren’t ready to engage the moment you are. And the stars may not simply align here: our data show that over the course of a typical day, busy couples have limited time together. In that window of time, the odds that you are both “turning toward” at the same time are low. Even if people are turning toward bids a majority of the time (60 percent), the chances that <i>both</i> partners are turning toward is only 36 percent. And even among the happily married couples we studied in the Love Lab, people whose bids for connection were not noticed or responded to would <i>rebid only 22 percent of the time</i>.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber23" id="SuperscriptNumber23" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> So, if you’re wanting to point out a pretty garden you’re passing as you drive together, maybe it’s no big deal. If you have a rich history of turning toward, you’re going to have a nice deep cushion in your emotional <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_98" role="doc-pagebreak" title="98"/>bank account, and missed bids will just roll off you like water off a duck. But if you’re itching to engage deeply with your partner about something important, you probably need to be more intentional.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">One couple figured out an effortless, ingenious way to handle the ubiquitous possibility of crossed wires and hurt feelings. Rachel and Jason had been together for twenty-seven years. They had two teenage daughters. And they remember well the early years of working two full-time jobs and parenting two little kids who needed their attention. Jason had always been a morning person; Rachel a night owl. When they did finally overlap and get some time together, it was gobbled up by logistics.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“We rarely had any time where we could talk about anything besides, ‘Who’s going to the grocery store? Who’s picking up the kids?’ ” Rachel said. “Once you deal with schedules and food, who has the bandwidth for anything else?”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The problem was, when one person did need to talk, the other was often in work mode, or parent mode, or just exhausted. There were irritable spats and misunderstandings. Hurt feelings lingered.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Then one day, dropping off her daughter at Montessori school, Rachel overheard the teacher giving the kids a gentle instruction: If they wanted to talk to a friend when that friend was engaged in play or some other activity, they should first ask them, “Are you available?” The friend was then free to say yes or no, or “After I’m done with this drawing.” The amazing thing was, the kids did it! Rachel laughed—it was so simple, basic, and elegant, a child could do it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_99" role="doc-pagebreak" title="99"/>She and Jason tried it out. This was the new rule: if she wanted to talk to him about something important (or vice versa), she’d say, “Are you available?” It immediately brought a level of ease to interactions that had previously been more fraught. There was no guilt in saying “In ten minutes,” or “After I finish this email.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“It made us pay attention to the moment,” Rachel said. Jason added, “It takes the pressure off. And when you are ready to engage, you can give your full attention. Everything just goes better.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Try it today: <i>Are you available?</i></p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>