<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-17">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_100" role="doc-pagebreak" title="100"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">ASK FOR WHAT YOU NEED . . . BY DESCRIBING YOURSELF!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">We all need to learn how to say what we want and need. It can feel uncomfortable or wobbly at first, but it’s like riding a bike—once you get started, you’ll quickly get the hang of it.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Today, your practice has three steps.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step One: Reflect.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">What do you need or want? Take a moment, right now, and think about what you’ve been wanting from your partner. Are you longing to spend more time with them? Do you need help with housework? Do you need to feel more supported in pursuing your career? Do you need to hear “I love you” more often?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step Two: Reframe.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">If you are thinking in the negative perspective, <i class="Box_ITAL">flip it</i>. Don’t point out what’s wrong. Offer an opportunity. What is the <i class="Box_ITAL">positive need</i> you would like them to fulfill?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Step Three: Describe yourself.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Always ask for what you need by talking about how you feel and what you need.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">“I miss you. Can we hang out tonight, no phones and no TV?”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_101" role="doc-pagebreak" title="101"/>“I am absolutely swamped this week. Could you take something off my plate?”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">“I’m feeling so tired today. Would you do bedtime with the kids tonight so I can rest for a few minutes? Then let’s sit and have a glass of wine.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">“I love being held by you. Give me a hug?”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Know what you need, say what you need, and you’ll very likely get what you need! Your partner wants to be there for you—so let them. Make it easy! A common phrase comes to mind that people will often say with a whiff of sarcasm when someone doesn’t guess exactly what they want: “Do I need to draw you a map?”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">We say: <i class="Box_ITAL">Yes!</i> Draw them a map. You’ll both be happier for it.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B-No-Space">When they feel attacked no matter how you ask . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Sometimes, no matter how great a job you do, your partner will interpret a statement of your want or need <i class="Box_ITAL">as</i> a criticism—even if you do your best to phrase it as a positive need. That happens when there’s been a pattern of criticism in the past, and when resentment has really built up over time. It happens when there’s been a lot of turning away from each other’s needs, too. Now there’s emotional distance and a default habit of scanning for what’s wrong, what’s missing, or what’s not perfect. If you’re that deep into the negative perspective, your partner can look at you <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_102" role="doc-pagebreak" title="102"/>longingly and say “I love you,” and all you will hear is criticism.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">But you <i class="Box_ITAL">can</i> change it.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">When you stop phrasing your needs and desires in critical terms, and instead replace them with softened start-ups and positive requests, you can quickly melt the ice. Your partner may be wary at first, and continue to hear criticism at every turn; you may then hear defensiveness in their response. If you do, the next time you make a request, be explicit. “I really do not want to criticize you here. I just want to say, I would love it if . . . [and state your <i class="Box_ITAL">positive</i> need].”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">Start slow.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Some couples need to ease into this. If today’s practice feels too difficult, try this instead: Rather than asking for a corrective (something they <i class="Box_ITAL">aren’t</i> doing that you want them to do; something you want them to do better or differently), just ask for something that would make you happy. Ask them to sit and watch a movie with you. Ask them to stop at the bakery on the way home and bring you your favorite treat. Ask them to fix that special drink they make so well. Ask them for a hug! Make a sweet request that they can easily fulfill, so you can genuinely say “Thank you! That felt great!”</p>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>