<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 6: Reach Out and Touch, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-18">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-19"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_103" role="doc-pagebreak" title="103"/>DAY 6</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-20">REACH OUT AND TOUCH</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Grace and Andrew were worried about their sex life. It was at an all-time low. They couldn’t exactly pinpoint why—they weren’t fighting. They got along fine. Yes, they were busy, but who wasn’t? Andrew worked at the nearby military base, in technology. A computer whiz, he loved when people asked what he did for work, so that he could give the answer that always made their ears perk up: “It’s classified.” Grace stayed home to raise their three young kids . . . as well as a flock of chickens, ducks, and soon (she hoped) goats. Their house was a colorful swirl of chaos—Grace, an artist and musician (she used to teach elementary school), led her kids through painting projects, guitar lessons, and cooking classes. Andrew came home, tossed his tie over his shoulder and cooked dinner while she cleaned out the chicken coop, or moved the interminable laundry to the dryer, all as the kids played and chased and fought and yelled. It was busy, it was loud, it was exhausting—but they were happy! Weren’t they? They both were starting to wonder. The sexual energy that had once drawn <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_104" role="doc-pagebreak" title="104"/>them toward each other like magnets seemed to have evaporated into thin air. They were becoming more like amiable partners running a business than like lovers.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They’d gone through droughts before when each of their children was born, but they’d always bounced back after. Now, their youngest was almost three years old. Everybody was sleeping at night now. There were no more babies waking up; no more toddlers crawling in between them. And yet, the fun, sweet, spontaneous sexual connection they’d previously enjoyed remained elusive. The season of sex should have returned, it seemed, and yet like some strange weather pattern, it hadn’t.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They’d tried a handful of strategies, like going out on a date, or scheduling a night to rendezvous in the bedroom, but it felt forced, and half the time, when they got in bed together, they just ended up going to sleep.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Andrew: “I’ll be thinking all day, <i>We are definitely having sex tonight!</i> But half the time she falls asleep before I even finish brushing my teeth. Or I fall asleep while she’s checking on the kids. Or we start talking about bills or what we have to do tomorrow and it kills the mood.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“But there’s not even any mood to kill!” Grace says. “We get in bed together, and all of a sudden it feels weird to just start making out. I mean, we haven’t even had the chance to hold hands all day or even just have a conversation. So I bring up something to talk about and somehow we never get around to the fun and the sex part.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">She added: “It just doesn’t seem fun anymore. It used to. And I want it to be like it used to! I don’t want to have to try so hard.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_105" role="doc-pagebreak" title="105"/>Another couple, Alicia and Abdul, have a very different life from Andrew and Grace’s, yet share the same problem. Their sleek apartment is nestled right in the heart of downtown Seattle. They work as lawyers for two of the area’s tech companies. Their passions are biking and travel. Now in their early forties, they haven’t had kids and don’t plan to.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When the city went into lockdown during the coronavirus pandemic, Alicia and Abdul looked for an upside: they’d have a lot more time for each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But as the pandemic year unfolded, things started to change. Home all day, on conference and Zoom calls, they felt dull and disconnected at the end of the day. The coffee shops and restaurants they used to go to had shuttered. They were both tired of cooking—they kept making the same things. They spent a great deal of time watching TV. They’d blown through all the prestige television series across all their various streaming services. They were trapped together in the same small apartment—and yet they were spending <i>less</i> time together. How was it possible? Neither one of them felt much like having sex. They felt like roommates. What was Alicia thinking about? Did Abdul even <i>want</i> to cuddle, or did he want his space?</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Is This “Normal”?</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">It’s natural to worry, and to wonder: <i>Are other people going through this? Or is it just us?</i> Chrisanna Northrup, coauthor of <i>The Normal Bar: The Surprising Secrets of Happy Couples and What They Reveal about Creating a New Normal in Your Relationship</i>, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_106" role="doc-pagebreak" title="106"/>was experiencing just this type of scenario when she launched into the project that would become her book. She was a busy mom and entrepreneur, starting a wellness business, when her relationship with her husband of fifteen years hit “the blahs.” As she struggled to figure out how to address the problem, she found herself wondering if other couples were dealing with the same thing—where did she and her husband fall on the spectrum of “normal” in relationships? And, if they were allegedly normal, what were <i>they</i> doing to fix the problem? What <i>was</i> normal when it came to communication, sex, conflict, and more?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">She enlisted the help of two of the most prominent sociologists in the US, Dr. Pepper Schwartz and Dr. James Witte, to get to the bottom of “normal” in modern love. These scientists had gathered a <i>lot</i> of data, from all around the world, to determine what was “universal” about relationships—across nationality, sexuality, race, socioeconomics, and more. Volunteers from twenty-three countries responded to a survey with over thirteen hundred questions designed to answer our burning questions about long-term relationships, including a particularly hot topic: Who out there has a great sex life, and how do they keep that flame going through the years?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">You might guess that the couples with the hottest sex lives were the ones who said yes to sex when their partner initiated it, or the ones who incorporated unusual new ways to spice things up, or the ones who were up for anything in the bedroom. Nope. In fact, what happened <i>in</i> the bedroom, once couples slid between the sheets, had very little to do with how satisfied <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_107" role="doc-pagebreak" title="107"/>partners were with their sex lives. Northrup, Schwartz, and Witte identified specific habits practiced by those in happy, thriving relationships where both partners were satisfied sexually.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber24" id="SuperscriptNumber24" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a></p>
			<div role="list">
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-First" role="listitem">1. They say “I love you” every day, and mean it.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">2. They kiss passionately for no reason at all.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">3. They give each other compliments (and surprise romantic gifts!).</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">4. They know what turns their partner on and off erotically.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">5. They are physically affectionate, even in public.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">6. They keep playing and having fun together.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">7. They cuddle—<i>often</i>.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">8. They make sex a priority, not the last item of a long to-do list.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">9. They stay good friends.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">10. They can talk comfortably about their sex life.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">11. They have weekly romantic dates.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered" role="listitem">12. They take romantic vacations.</p>
				<p class="x07-List-Numbered-Last" role="listitem">13. They are mindful about turning toward.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Don’t be overwhelmed by this list! If you feel like you could use improvement in some of the areas listed above, remember: <i>you’re already working on this</i>. All of the practices we’ve been asking you to incorporate into your routine this week are here: Offering compliments. Being curious and asking questions that really go places. Putting time for each other at the top of your to-do list instead of at the bottom. And notice: the vast majority of habits on this list happen long before you and your partner <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_108" role="doc-pagebreak" title="108"/>end up in bed together, even the ones that involve physical affection. Today, this is what we’re going to focus on: <i>touch</i>.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Touch is a powerful drug. Physical intimacy has a physiological effect on the body—it releases oxytocin, the hormone that helps with bonding and connection. It’s what bonds mothers and babies together just after birth. When oxytocin hits the bloodstream, we experience all kinds of beneficial effects. It lowers blood pressure, washes away stress, even reduces your risk of heart disease.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber25" id="SuperscriptNumber25" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> Touch is not just good for your relationship; it’s good for your physical health and longevity. For us humans, it’s as necessary as water, as food—even as the air we breathe.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Touch Is Like Oxygen . . .</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We can’t survive without it. Physical touch is critical to our survival as a species. Humans, as we’ve said, are pack animals—we die without one another, without connection, without physical contact. We discovered long ago that if you take a human infant and isolate her, she has a greater chance of dying, even if you give her all the food and water she needs.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber26" id="SuperscriptNumber26" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[3]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Those of us in the field of psychology were reminded of this recently, during the COVID-19 pandemic. People were self-isolating and quarantining, in alignment with instructions from the Centers for Disease Control. But a lot of people don’t live with family and aren’t coupled up. They were alone. As the weeks stretched into months, then to a full year, the effects of isolation took their toll. Many people who’d been quarantining alone <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_109" role="doc-pagebreak" title="109"/>began to experience “touch deprivation,”<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber27" id="SuperscriptNumber27" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[4]</a> which researcher Dr. Tiffany Field says is strongly linked to anxiety and depression.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber28" id="SuperscriptNumber28" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[5]</a> Other studies have referred to this effect as “touch starvation,” an apt phrase to describe what happens when we don’t have a regular diet of physical contact. While welcome physical touch releases oxytocin, which shifts the body into “rest and repair” mode, touch starvation does the opposite. Stress goes up. Anxiety goes up. This causes the overproduction of cortisol—a helpful metabolic hormone in the correct dosage, but when there’s too much in the bloodstream, it shoots you into fight-or-flight mode. Heart rate increases, blood pressure rises, breathing becomes shallow. Over time, it can interfere with digestion and even suppress the immune system. Touch starvation can, quite literally, make you sick.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber29" id="SuperscriptNumber29" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[6]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Field, a developmental psychologist, currently heads the Touch Research Institute at the University of Miami. She has called touch “the mother of all senses.” Field herself had a firsthand experience with the potency of human touch. In the mid-1970s, when she was a graduate student, she gave birth to her daughter a month early, at thirty weeks. At the time, the accepted medical knowledge was that premature babies should not be touched—the risk of infection was too high. They were keeping babies in incubators; there was no contact between parents and infants. But Field believed that touch could help her daughter thrive. She convinced the hospital staff to let her massage her daughter, and found that the baby became calmer and ate more. She began working to develop an incubator that hospitals could <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_110" role="doc-pagebreak" title="110"/>use for premature babies that would allow parents to touch and connect with their babies physically, while also keeping the baby antiseptically incubated and shielded from infection. She ran a study and found that when parents touched their premature infants, the babies thrived, gained weight faster, and were discharged from the hospital almost a full week earlier.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber30" id="SuperscriptNumber30" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[7]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It’s not just infants who benefit so profoundly from physical touch and connection. We ran a study on adults among couples who were expecting their first child. We found that fifteen minutes of touch per day—in the form of a neck or shoulder massage for the woman who was pregnant—had a profound impact on the rates of postpartum depression (PPD) after birth. In couples who practiced the fifteen minutes of massage per day, 22 percent of the new mothers showed signs of PPD. In the group that did not practice touch? The incidence of PPD shot up to 66 percent. Just fifteen minutes of massage, of physical touch and physical connection, made that difference.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber31" id="SuperscriptNumber31" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[8]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We thrive on touch—and it doesn’t have to be sexual. Sex is an important part of a relationship, but complicated for some. Many people think that the only way to experience touch is through sex or activities that lead to sex—not true. Research shows that people of all genders who cuddle have more satisfying long-term relationships.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">OK—so touch is good for us. It’s good for our health. It’s good for our relationships. Data show that casual touch between couples—holding hands, kissing, being physically affectionate in public or really anytime—correlates with a thriving sex life. We know how great it is . . . so what gets in the way?</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_111" role="doc-pagebreak" title="111"/>Touch Taboos and Other Obstacles</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We bring all kinds of stuff with us into a relationship. An influential factor is the culture we grew up with. For a lot of us, this is something we’ve never paused to think about—but some cultures are more touch-averse than others.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In the 1960s, the researcher Sidney Jourard conducted a now-famous field study that has come to be called “the coffeehouse study.” He traveled around the world, parked himself in coffee shops, and observed the couples who came in. He counted how many times, in one hour, the couples touched each other in any way: holding hands; stroking each other’s arm, back, or hair; knees leaning together; and so on. What he found: In Paris, France, couples touched each other an average of 110 times an hour. In Gainesville, Florida, they touched twice an hour. And in London, England, zero times. Jourard concluded that certain cultures (including ones many of us have lived within our whole lives) seem to have a “touch taboo.”<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber32" id="SuperscriptNumber32" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[9]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">If culture is the larger ocean we swim in, then family is the smaller pond. How you were raised versus how your partner was raised can impact your comfort level with touch and your physical touch−related needs. If either of you grew up in a low-touch or even no-touch household, then physical touch—even from a life partner—can be uncomfortable or anxiety provoking. In some cases, when people have experienced abuse, touch can trigger fear, even if it’s kind, loving touch. This can make touch “double-edged”: it can be wonderful, comforting, arousing, but it can feel threatening if it’s done quickly, too roughly, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_112" role="doc-pagebreak" title="112"/>or by surprise. We have to be conscious of our partners’ backgrounds, and the way they’ve been touched (or not!) in the past.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Our romantic relationships don’t exist in a vacuum—our habits surrounding touch are influenced by an array of factors that may at first be invisible to us. There are all kinds of reasons why we each have different “settings” when it comes to what kind of touch, and how much touch, we’re comfortable with and need. But no matter where you are on the spectrum, you can incorporate more loving touch into your life with your partner in a way that feels good to you. You don’t have to be alone and self-quarantining in a global pandemic to experience what some psychologists refer to as “skin hunger”: an acute need for more touch than you are currently getting.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Are there differences in the need for touch and desire for sex between men and women? The stereotype is certainly that men tend to want sex more than women do. Is it true? Well, sort of. On average, research shows that in a typical day, men think about sex twice as often as women do.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber33" id="SuperscriptNumber33" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[10]</a> But everyone is different. Plenty of heterosexual relationships flip the script on this one, where the woman has a higher sex drive than the man does. Women in particular may wonder about their libido as they age—it’s natural to worry if you feel your sex drive is waning. We counsel many women who are wondering, <i>What’s wrong with me?</i> We can tell you confidently: <i>nothing</i>. The reality is that it’s not unusual for women to begin to lose their sex drive. Let’s not forget that in prehistoric times, the human life expectancy was about age forty.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber34" id="SuperscriptNumber34" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[11]</a> Women didn’t need a sex drive later in life because they didn’t <i>have</i> a “later.” But here’s the thing: positive, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_113" role="doc-pagebreak" title="113"/>intimate, relaxing, nonsexual touch is great for us all in so many ways—including stirring up the heat of a libido that may be in a new and less active phase. What we’ve seen in the couples we’ve worked with: when men, or partners of women, approach the woman not <i>just</i> with pure sexuality but with positive nonsexual touch (cuddling, a massage, a foot rub), it’s so relaxing and stimulating that it can lead to sexuality.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">What this <i>doesn’t</i> mean is that you should manipulate your partner into sex, or expect that every moment of physical connection or expression will lead to sex. What it also doesn’t mean is that if someone doesn’t want to have sex at the drop of a hat, they aren’t interested in sex or wouldn’t want to, ever. For many men (though not all), sexual desire leads to contact. For many women (again, not all), contact leads to sexual desire. Wherever you land on the sexual spectrum, you may recognize your own patterns in one of these descriptions. Many people can become aroused much more easily if the touch is nonsexual to begin with.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The point is <i>touch for the sake of touch</i>. Physical intimacy does not need to lead to sex for it to be worthwhile. One of the best things you can do is to erase the expectation that it will, or should. Touch is its own whole nutrient that both of your bodies need.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Talk about It!</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">The issues we discussed above—including culture, background, family, trauma—highlight the fact that it’s important to not just practice touch, but to <i>talk</i> about it. We can be, even after years together, unaware of certain needs or preferences our partners <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_114" role="doc-pagebreak" title="114"/>have surrounding how or when they are touched. You may find it calming, for example, to be hugged and held when you’re anxious or angry, but your partner may become agitated or frustrated by the very same gesture. In a moment like that, you can simply say, “What do you need right now? Would you like to be held, or do you want some space?” It comes down to communication: addressing where, when, and how you want to be touched.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Ask each other:</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>What kinds of touch do you most like?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>What do you not like?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>When is your favorite time to be touched or hugged?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>Are there times when you don’t want to be touched?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><i>Are there some places you like to be touched more than others?</i></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">With the last question, we’re talking more about nonsexual times. People will often have specific areas of their bodies that they most like to have massaged or rubbed, which they find relaxing or soothing, but their partners might not know about those.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">When we see couples like Grace and Andrew, who want to bring more energy, passion, and spontaneity into their sex life, the number one thing we tell them to do is: <i>talk about it!</i> Have a conversation. You have to be able to talk about touch. If you’re not used to addressing it head on, it can feel a little wobbly, like riding a bike. But try out the simple questions above and you’ll soon get the hang of it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And the second thing is: don’t fixate on the bedroom! You’ll notice that there’s nothing in this week’s practices that asks you to do anything specific when it comes to your sex life. That’s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_115" role="doc-pagebreak" title="115"/>because when it comes to sex, each relationship is wildly different. There is no magical number, no set data point, on how much sex you should be having in order to have a great, fulfilling, and long-lasting union. Models for success in that arena are all over the map. What we do know is that practicing these tiny habits—including affectionate touch—is going to ramp up your friendship, affection, appreciation, understanding, and trust. And yeah—you’ll probably have more sex, too.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">“The Trust Molecule”</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Touch is powerful, even nonsexual touch. It’s soothing. It helps you connect emotionally. It’s not an illusion that when your partner takes your hand, you feel more attuned to them. The psychologist James Coan ran this experiment: A woman was put into an fMRI tube for a brain scan with an electrode attached to one of her big toes. Inside the tube, right where she could see it, a projector showed her one of two possible images: a green circle or a red <i>x</i>. When the red <i>x</i> appeared, a quarter of the time, she’d receive a mild electric shock. (It wasn’t painful, but it wasn’t pleasant.) What Coan saw on the brain scan was that when she was shown the red <i>x</i>, the anticipation of the electric shock would reliably turn on the fear system in her brain: her two amygdalae, down in the temporal lobe of the brain a few inches behind the eyes, would light up.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">So then Coan introduced a twist. He set up a new condition and compared three scenarios: In the first, the woman’s husband sat next to the fMRI tube and held her hand. In the second, a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_116" role="doc-pagebreak" title="116"/>stranger held her hand. In the third, nobody held her hand—she was alone.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The results? With either no one or a stranger holding her hand, the fear system of the brain lit up just as before. But when her husband held her hand, the fear system shut down completely. She saw the red <i>x</i>, which should have triggered the anticipatory fear response—but it didn’t.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber35" id="SuperscriptNumber35" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[12]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Coan ran the study again with same-sex couples and found the identical result. This was before the Supreme Court decision to legalize same-sex marriage, so Coan asked them: Did they consider themselves married? Were they committed to each other? If the answer was yes, they showed reduced fear response. Feeling committed was like protective armor against fear.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber36" id="SuperscriptNumber36" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[13]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Just holding hands—that’s all it took. It’s just a small, minimal touch, something we do casually, barely thinking about it—we reach out and take our partner’s hand. And we could do it even more often. Even this simple touch is powerful, because like any welcome touch from someone you love, it causes oxytocin to be secreted into the bloodstream. Researcher Paul Zak calls oxytocin “the molecule of trust.” How powerful is it? <i>Very.</i> Zak ran an experiment in which he gave people money and had them play a trust game that involved giving away money to other players: If you gave your money away, the amount itself tripled. But you had to trust the other person to funnel some of it back to you. On average, people would give away half the money they were given and keep the other half. They were fairly conservative. But then, squirt a little bit of oxytocin up their nose, and they gave away more. They immediately became more trusting.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber37" id="SuperscriptNumber37" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[14]</a></p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_117" role="doc-pagebreak" title="117"/>If you’ve ever made a bad decision in a relationship, or been swept off your feet by someone irresistible and utterly wrong for you, oxytocin may be to blame. It’s also sometimes called “the hormone of bad judgment”—in another study, people under its intoxicating influence made poor investment decisions, trusting someone who was quite obviously a con man.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber38" id="SuperscriptNumber38" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[15]</a> The point is, it’s powerful! So use it for good—with your partner. And the power to do so is indeed in your hands, simply through touching each other. There’s something else, Zak now says, that works just as well as a synthetic oxytocin nasal spray to get the love and bonding hormones flowing through your veins: a twenty-second hug.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber39" id="SuperscriptNumber39" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[16]</a> Holding hands, a hug, a kiss, a few minutes of shoulder massage—they might seem like small actions, but they pack a lot of power. Here’s what we tell people: Every chance you get, hug your partner for twenty seconds. And whenever you can snatch a moment, kiss for six seconds.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Why hug for twenty seconds? Because that’s exactly how long it takes for oxytocin to metabolize in your bloodstream.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And why six, for the kiss? Well, that’s just our intuition. And besides, it feels good!</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">The Magic of Mini-Touches</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">So what happened with Grace and Andrew? Those two had a solid foundation. But they were losing ground. They wanted more time for sex, for contact, for intimacy, but they didn’t have the time, and they weren’t making time. Their lives had split into two parallel lives—Andrew was at the base, doing his classified <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_118" role="doc-pagebreak" title="118"/>work; Grace was home setting up fingerpaints and teaching little fingers how to play chords on the guitar. In the evening, it was a sprint: to get dinner made, to get everybody bathed and in bed, and then to loop back to the computer for the inevitable final round of emails or paperwork. The bills, the dishes, the pets, the laundry. Sometimes, in the evening, they’d settle down to watch a favorite show on Netflix, one about a couple who has the most extreme long-distance relationship you could ever imagine: she’s an astronaut on a three-year mission to Mars; he stays home at mission control and raises their daughter. Even when watching this show, they’d end up on separate pieces of furniture instead of together—Grace under a blanket on the couch, Andrew in an armchair across the room.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That their sex life seemed lackluster was a problem, sure, but it was the canary in the coal mine. They <i>missed</i> each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We worked on emotional connection. But they really needed the connection of physical touch to span the distance being created by their busy, separate lives. So what we started working on was <i>mini-touches</i>. Little quick touches as they were running by each other. A quick kiss. A squeeze on the shoulder. A hug.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We worked on how they welcome each other at the end of the day. This was the plan we came up with: whoever arrives home second (often it was Andrew, arriving from work, but sometimes it would be Grace and the kids coming home from errands or school pickup) throws open the door and announces, “I’M HERE!” And the first comes to the door and greets them with a hug and a kiss.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They loved it. It was fun. It was funny! The kids got into it. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_119" role="doc-pagebreak" title="119"/>They loved to run in the door and scream, “I’M HERE! I’M HERE!” They loved their parents standing in the middle of the chaos, giving each other a long hug.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">They began to find all kinds of times to add in rituals for physical connection. In the morning, they started saying goodbye with a kiss—even if Andrew left early, he’d kiss her while she was sleeping. A German study, discussed in the book <i>The Science of Kissing</i>, found that men who kiss their wives goodbye in the morning live five years longer than men who don’t.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber40" id="SuperscriptNumber40" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[17]</a> Good night rituals are also wonderful whether you have sex that night or not. How <i>else</i> do you say good night to your partner? Kiss, hug, hold each other for a while and talk until everybody’s drowsy and ready for sleep? This can be a sweet moment.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">A recent study looked at 184 couples and investigated the link between emotional attachment and physical “touch satisfaction.”<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber41" id="SuperscriptNumber41" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[18]</a> The focus was on <i>nonsexual</i> intimate touch: hugging, hand-holding, cuddling, and such. Unsurprisingly, they did indeed find a strong link. But what was really interesting is that people were all over the map in terms of touch needs and touch anxiety (wanting more than they were getting). But even when people reported that they <i>weren’t</i> getting as much touch as they would like, their relationships were improved when they saw their partner making an effort. In other words, just seeing and feeling your partner making a point to reach out and connect physically was enough to give love a boost.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In the Love Lab, with those three thousand couples we observed, the patterns of physical connection were clear.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber42" id="SuperscriptNumber42" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[19]</a> The successful couples—the ones who were still happily together six <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_120" role="doc-pagebreak" title="120"/>years later—were the ones who touched each other affectionately while they were cooking, cleaning, talking about the weather. They were the ones who held hands; the ones who touched each other encouragingly, even as they worked through a conflict; the ones who leaned toward each other rather than away, so that if you were to draw a line straight down from the crown of each of their heads, those lines would always be in the process of coming together, like the two descending sides of a drawbridge, about to connect.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>