<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-19">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_121" role="doc-pagebreak" title="121"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">THE MAGIC OF MINI-TOUCH</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">To get that healing dose of oxytocin, you need to put the time in. But even little bits of time add up. A moment here, a moment there—they make a difference. They aggregate and build exponentially, strengthening your emotional and physical connection. So today’s assignment is to <i class="Box_ITAL">create as many moments of physical connection as possible</i>. This doesn’t have to be about sex—just sitting together on the couch, holding hands, or stopping for a hug will all establish and nourish your physical connection and emotional closeness. What you do is up to you, and any amount is good. The more the better! But do talk about it with your partner and make sure you’re both on board. This should be natural, comfortable, and fun. As long as everyone’s all-in, then go for the whole list!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Kissing activates five out of twelve cranial nerves, and that’s very good! And a twenty-second hug releases oxytocin into your bloodstream. Your blood vessels dilate. Your brain receives more oxygen. The physical effects are real. So go get that love hormone: it’s good for your brain, your body, and your relationship.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">How many of these can you pack into the day?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Check as many as you’d like!</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist-First">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist-First">Kiss . . . for six seconds</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Hug. . . . for twenty seconds</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_122" role="doc-pagebreak" title="122"/>Hold hands . . . for as long as you like</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Trade a ten-minute massage (one person sits on the couch, the other on the floor in front of them . . . then swap)</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Cuddle on the couch</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Put an arm around your partner</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Touch each other’s hand or arm while you’re talking</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Put a hand on your partner’s shoulder if they’re stressed</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist">Touch foreheads</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x07-List-Checklist-Last">
						<p class="x07-List-Checklist-Last">Touch feet under the table</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Reflect . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Now, toward the end of the day, spend a few minutes sharing with your partner how it felt to touch a little more that day—both giving and receiving touch. Was there any particular moment or type of touch that you really appreciated? What kind of touch felt best for you? What types of touch would you like to integrate more regularly into your relationship? Talk about how you could do so more consistently. You’ll be glad you did.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B-No-Space">If you feel pressured by touch . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">We tend to think that if our partners are touching us a lot, they want sex, but that might not necessarily be true. One partner might just be looking for closeness and connection; the other perceives a desire for something more, doesn’t <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_123" role="doc-pagebreak" title="123"/>want that in that particular moment, and pushes affectionate touch away.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">To clear things up: Talk specifically about where affectionate touch stops and erotic touch begins. Where’s that boundary for you? When your partner knows better what signals he or she is giving you in the way they’re touching you, it can be easier to just enjoy affectionate touch without pressure, and to engage in erotic touch when welcome.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">If you and your partner have different levels of touch needs . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Some people are less comfortable with touch or need less of it. Others crave it as a road to intimacy and to feeling accepted. Sometimes, we’ve worked with couples where a huge gulf in touch comfort becomes a serious problem. But usually, partners can learn to navigate each other’s touch comfort. This can be cultural, as we discussed, and deeply ingrained.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">If you get feedback from your partner that they would like <i class="Box_ITAL">less</i> touch than what you’ve been initiating, don’t take it as a rejection. Understand that people have different backgrounds and different childhood experiences. These experiences create an imprint of what you’re comfortable with, and not comfortable with: whether your family was big on hugs and physical intimacy, for example, is incredibly formative. What we were raised with forms these deep footprints in our brains that we tend to step right into in our adult relationships.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_124" role="doc-pagebreak" title="124"/>So remember: one of our lifelong missions is to have compassion for these enduring vulnerabilities. It isn’t your partner’s fault that they feel this way. It’s not a rejection of you. It’s just the way it is. Here’s a parallel: you have really light blue eyes and have to wear sunglasses, but your partner doesn’t like that because they want to be able to look into your eyes. Well . . . there’s nothing you can do about that. Accepting that it’s nobody’s fault, that this is just the way it is, can go a long way.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B">When touch is really touchy . . .</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">If you have a partner who has experienced unwanted touch in their past—whether sexual assault or abuse—you need to talk to them about what kinds of touch are OK and which are not. Talking about touch (instead of just guessing) is important for all couples, as we covered today, but especially crucial in this case. People who’ve experienced sexual trauma or abuse can certainly benefit from therapy, but issues surrounding which types of touch make them feel safe, relaxed, and turned on, versus the types that elicit a defensive, uncomfortable, or fearful response, may never be “fixed.” So talk to your partner. “What’s your favorite way that I touch you? Are there any ways I touch or hug you that you don’t like?”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Julie, who has experienced sexual assault, doesn’t like to be hugged from behind, or even surprised by touch. In our long marriage together, we’ve figured out ways around <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_125" role="doc-pagebreak" title="125"/>this. When John is coming in for a hug or snuggle and isn’t sure whether Julie has spotted him, he says “Incoming!” When Julie hears that, his embrace is always <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_126" role="doc-pagebreak" title="126"/>welcome.</p>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>