<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Day 7: Declare a Date Night, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-20">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Number" id="_idParaDest-21"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_127" role="doc-pagebreak" title="127"/>DAY 7</h1>
			<h1 class="x03-Chapter-Title" id="_idParaDest-22">DECLARE A DATE NIGHT</h1>
			<p class="x03-CO-Body-Text">Let’s talk about loneliness in marriage.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It sounds negative, but it’s a fact of life for so many couples. So if you feel it, or have ever felt it, you aren’t an outlier. This is common. We can spend years or decades together, raise kids, and occupy the same space, but instead of <i>sharing</i> a life as we intended, we’re living parallel lives. We can find ourselves sitting in the same room with the person we married or committed to, the person we love, and feel very alone.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">In 2002, the Sloan Center at UCLA launched a study like none that had ever been done before. They sent social scientists into the homes of busy families—dual-career couples with kids—who recorded each family’s every waking moment over the course of one week. It was like a reality TV show before the era of reality TV: researchers with handheld cameras would follow people around from room to room, taping every interaction, conversation, and sigh. This was quite different from our Love Lab, where unobtrusive cameras captured the data, and couples could <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_128" role="doc-pagebreak" title="128"/>immediately feel alone with each other. Here, there was a living, breathing person standing in the same room with them, zooming in as participants hashed something out with their partner. It seems like the participants would feel awkward and self-conscious being observed, right?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Study participants later reported that, in fact, they <i>did</i> start to forget that someone else was there. As strange and invasive as it felt at first, the camera-carrying anthropologists quickly melted into the background, and participants were able to just be normal and natural in their homes. As a result, by the end of the weeklong study, the 1,540 hours of videotape that researchers amassed offered an accurate portrait of how couples operated in the real world: how much time they spent with each other, or with their children, or on household chores; their fights and their negotiations; their sweet moments and their bad ones, too. The cameras turned on as they woke and began preparing for the day, and didn’t turn off until the last light was switched off.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The study was conducted in West Los Angeles, in middle-class neighborhoods.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber43" id="SuperscriptNumber43" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[1]</a> Thirty-two families participated, and the sample captured LA’s diversity: Black, Latino, Asian, and mixed-race families were profiled, along with several same-sex couples. The study became a treasure trove of data offering insight into how modern couples actually live. One thing that stuck out: husbands and wives were alone together in the same room only 10 percent of the time. But much more shocking was this fact: the average amount of time that couples spent in conversation with each other was a mere <i>thirty-five minutes per week</i>. And <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_129" role="doc-pagebreak" title="129"/>most of those conversations were about logistics: errands, bills, or who’s going to do what. Hardly any of those conversations were about deeper subjects—the topics that are less urgent, but actually more important. There was no “How was your day?” Or, “How is your job going?” “Do you feel like you’re doing too much?” “What’s on your mind?” If they had dinner together, they were talking to the kids instead of to each other. (Valuable in its own right, but not the same as connecting as a couple.) It was clear by the end of the study that for the vast majority of couples, their lives had become this infinite to-do list, and they were neglecting the relationship that was at the center of it all.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The Sloan study focused on dual-income couples with kids, but we’ve seen this happen with every configuration: couples with kids where one stays home and the other goes to work; couples where both work; even couples where neither works because they’ve managed an early retirement or are taking time off. Couples without kids experience the same—we get work-oriented and exhausted; by the time we come home at night, we just want to crash on the couch and watch something on TV. We might be in the same room, but we aren’t talking to each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">There’s nothing wrong with this. We all need to decompress and relax sometimes; other times, we need to get stuff done: get the kids into bed, run the laundry, catch up on work. That’s life! But if we do this day after day, we lose track of who the other person is. Love maps begin to fade.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">People change and evolve over time, and time goes by quickly—much more quickly than it might seem. Young couples with kids <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_130" role="doc-pagebreak" title="130"/>(but it’s really true for all of us) will often put their heads down and just go, go, go. But if we don’t look up and pause every so often to check where our partners are—what they’re thinking about, what they’re worried about, excited about, what they dream about—when we finally do stop and try to connect with them, they’re going to feel really far away. It gets harder and harder to reach them, or for them to reach us.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We can be quite successful—paying the bills, working hard, getting everything done, excelling and working toward goals—but may spend so much time <i>not</i> focused on each other that we become really out of touch with each other, in every way. The Sloan study hit on something that is truly universal for couples everywhere: Once committed and settled down, they stop paying attention to the relationship. Other concerns seem more urgent and emergent. The relationship—that solid, foundational bedrock on which we build our adult lives—gets taken for granted. And without upkeep and maintenance, it can start to crack and crumble.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Go Out and Have Some Fun</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">We wanted to be able to better answer the questions: <i>Who goes for couples therapy? What drives them there?</i> We surveyed more than forty thousand couples, across different sexual orientations, who were about to begin therapy.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber44" id="SuperscriptNumber44" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[2]</a> Eighty percent of them reported that “fun had come to die” in their relationship. They’d lost the ability to just enjoy each other.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_131" role="doc-pagebreak" title="131"/>Michele Weiner-Davis, a social worker and author, has written about “the sex-starved marriage,” in which a couple’s sex life has faded away.<a class="Endnote-Reference" href="27_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber45" id="SuperscriptNumber45" role="doc-noteref" title="note">[3]</a> In her experience, when couples come in for counseling, they don’t often bring up their sex life as their number one complaint—there are other problems they present as the primary issue, such as the division of household labor, finances, or differences in parenting styles. But then it becomes apparent that they’ve lost touch with each other—physically, emotionally, and intellectually. They are living parallel lives that have stopped intersecting.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But what we’ve seen is that even when people go to sex therapy, often the sex therapy fails. Why? We theorize that the sex therapy sometimes feels too narrow. It’s only a surface problem. It’s not the core problem. The problem is bigger than sex. Yes, sexuality is missing. But so is sensuality, adventure, and <i>fun</i>. It’s almost as if we’ve gotten the message that “adulting” means shutting down the imagination you had as a kid—the play, the imagination, the creativity. We come to believe that we need to let go of these “childish” pursuits in order to be successful. But a successful relationship is <i>built</i> upon these things. They’re part of our best nature as humans. Our best art and thinking come from them; and our most intimate moments come from them, too. And yet moment to moment, day by day, they fall to the bottom of our long, long list of triaged priorities.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Many couples, without intending to, have shut down their openness to sensuality, adventure, and fun, and all the strategies we try with them go nowhere. They aren’t responsive to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_132" role="doc-pagebreak" title="132"/>touch, to open-ended questions, or to romantic overtures from their partners. They’ve even stopped enjoying great meals, or exploring new things to cook in the kitchen. The “sex-starved marriage” really isn’t only about sex, fundamentally. It’s one where people have, over time, shut down all forms of openness: to sensuality, to adventure, to play and silliness, to learning together. They’ve lost track of all of these reasons they got into the relationship to begin with: being close to each other physically, cuddling, having great conversations and relaxing together, dancing together, exploring together, and traveling together. It’s all been slowly and gradually replaced by an infinite to-do list and eventually . . . loneliness takes the place of connection.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">It happened to us at a certain point in our marriage. We were both insanely busy. John was teaching full-time, writing grants, and publishing papers. Julie spent a full forty hours a week in sessions with patients, and that didn’t include the rest of the job: the paperwork, the preparation, and the research. We were both working at least sixty hours a week. We’d always been a busy, ambitious, two-career couple from the first moment we met—but now, it was all taking its toll. We were snappy with each other—irritable and short-tempered. At home, we moved apart instead of toward each other, like magnets flipped the wrong way. We had definitely stopped going on dates. We both had so much work to catch up on at night. And we were so tired. The <i>last</i> thing we wanted to do was go out.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">But one day, we had yet another little fight about something—who knows what. The fight was really about something else. It <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_133" role="doc-pagebreak" title="133"/>was about how distant we were. How we weren’t even touching each other anymore. Our relationship was starving for a lack of positive touch. And we suddenly realized that we didn’t want to live like this.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We both agreed on one thing: We needed some time together. We needed a date. We were marriage experts—how many people had we advised on this very thing?</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We got our calendars out and started flipping, looking for a day we both had free, but there was nothing but conflicts.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Let’s just go out tonight,” John said. “Let’s drop everything and go.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We cleared the evening. We got dressed up, like we had a party to attend, and went down to the Hotel Sorrento in downtown Seattle, a gorgeous old redbrick hotel that’s been there since 1909 and has the lush, faded luxury of that era. We weren’t guests there. But we pretended we were. We strode confidently in and commandeered a velvet couch right by the fireplace. We each ordered one drink, and then sat and talked for hours on that couch, while the fire flickered away by our feet. Other guests milled about, sat for a while, and left—we outlasted them all. Nobody noticed that we didn’t belong or kicked us out. It was cheap and felt slightly illicit, which was a thrill. It was a great date.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The effect of that one date was, quite literally, immediate. Walking out of the hotel we felt transformed—sitting by that fire had reignited our own.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">The next day, making coffee and packing up our lunches in the kitchen, we had the same conversations we always did about <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_134" role="doc-pagebreak" title="134"/>the logistics of the day—who was going where, when, how, and so on—but this time we felt like magnets flipped the right way again.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That one emergency date was so successful, we decided to make date night a weekly thing. No matter what, we would go. And we did. We’d be tired. We’d have work to do that we’d have to push into the next day, which was always a strain. But we went, no matter what—and it worked. It was a lifeline.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">And the Sorrento became <i>our spot</i>. We didn’t go there for every date—sometimes our dates were as simple as sitting on the front stoop of our house with a glass of wine or tea, watching the walkers and cyclists and cars pass through the neighborhood in the evening, talking about the events of the day, the things we had read or thought about, or the future. But once every couple of months, we put on our fancy clothes, went down to the Sorrento, and claimed our couch. John would bring a yellow notepad and take notes—the consummate researcher and scientist, he brought his curiosity and passion to date night as well. He’d have a list of open-ended questions to ask. Usually, we got so deep into talking about the first couple of questions that we never even made it through the list.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We all have pressures and responsibilities. We have a list of things to accomplish in a day that often is just not possible. The researchers who ran the Sloan study on working couples noted that for most people, it seemed like they had three jobs between them—the two careers, and then the incessant work of running a home and raising kids. Yes, you want to be successful at work, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_135" role="doc-pagebreak" title="135"/>to show up for the people in your life, to crush your to-do list. But the bottom line is, you don’t want to sacrifice your happiness in your relationship in order to do it.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">That’s why we are imploring people not only to keep date night on the calendar, but also to keep adventure and play alive. So many couples today have become “devitalized.” And it’s not just sex—it’s everything. We’ve been drained of that energy, that life force, that electric urge to be close to one another, to be touching, to be talking, to be discovering new things about each other and, by extension, ourselves: what we want, what we dream, what we already have and appreciate. So when you want to start romance up again with a devitalized couple, it’s not just opening up the bedroom. It’s opening up <i>everything</i>. That’s why date night isn’t about where you go—or if you go anywhere at all. It’s about the two of you, with no distractions.</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A">Doing Date Night Right</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Most of us hear “date,” and we think <i>restaurant</i>. And yes, you can absolutely take your sweetie to a restaurant for your date! But to go on a date that matters, you do not have to get gussied up and make a reservation. In fact, we’d love it if you expanded your definition of a “date.”</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">A date is about expanding your love maps. It’s about asking open-ended questions and seeing where you end up. It’s about being physically close to each other, in the same space, getting some positive touch from your partner, which is as refreshing <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_136" role="doc-pagebreak" title="136"/>as water is to a plant. And most importantly, dates are about <i>adventure</i>. This could be a literal adventure: going someplace new together, like sneaking into a fancy hotel. Or it might be more of a metaphorical adventure: sitting on the porch together, watching the sun set behind the trees, and seeing where the conversation takes you.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">We’ve seen couples get incredibly inventive with dates. One couple would meet at a bar after work—but they wouldn’t arrive as themselves. They would arrive in character and role-play a scenario, improvising as they sipped their happy hour cocktails. One time, he was in the KGB and she was with the CIA; they each tried to recruit the other. They did it once a month, with new characters each time. For them, it was a way to play around with identity and desire, to be imaginative and riff off each other, to find nuggets of truth in the identities they slipped on, briefly, like a coat.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Another couple who lived near an amusement park would walk there on date night, get on the Ferris wheel, and talk and laugh as the big, light-spangled wheel made its slow turn, eventually pausing them at the very top of the ride, where they could see the whole town spread out below them as they chatted about their plans for tomorrow, the weekend, or the next five years. Another, a couple who lives on Orcas Island and whose small house is often overtaken by their teenagers and their friends, would fill a backpack with candles, a bottle of wine, and cheese and apples. Then they’d walk down to the long dock that jutted out into the channel between that island and the next, spread out their picnic, and sit down there, listening to the seals <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_137" role="doc-pagebreak" title="137"/>clapping for fish on the water until it got too cold and the candles blew out. Even just meeting in the middle of the workday at a special park bench, eating your lunch off your knees while strangers pass by, can be a wonderful date.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Usually, our advice is to keep the date limited to just the two of you. But sometimes, it’s the whole family that needs adventure. When our daughter was young, she’d get overwhelmed by her own to-do list (kids can be just like adults in this regard). One dull weekend she said to us, “I hate the weekends! All I do is homework!” So we shooed her into the car and drove down to the ferry dock in downtown Seattle, where the big green-and-white boats depart every half hour and slip across the Puget Sound to various islands and peninsulas. We didn’t plan or look at the schedule. We just got in line, drove onto the next boat, and ended up wherever it took us. These impromptu adventures became a kind of tradition. Once, we arrived at a little island town full of wineries, bookshops, and galleries and wandered through the village looking at pottery and eating fudge right out of the bag. Another time, we ended up at an empty, windy beach, and we walked up and down, hunting for beach glass, laughing and yelling over the wind. It was amazing how many years we had lived in the area, just a short ferry ride away, and had never been to any of these places.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Date night does not have to be at night. It doesn’t have to cost money. It doesn’t have to require a babysitter. You don’t even have to leave the house (although we will take you through a few important ground rules about what kinds of activities are great for date night, and which are not so great). As the pandemic <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_138" role="doc-pagebreak" title="138"/>stretched on, one couple, Vanessa and Carlos, took their date night to the backyard. They’d start a fire in the firepit early in the evening and let their three kids (ages two, six, and ten) roast marshmallows and eat s’mores. At bedtime, they’d stoke the fire with extra wood, put the baby to sleep, and launch the older two boys into their nighttime routine. Then they’d return to the fire outside and sit out there together—no phones, just the crackle of the wood. The kids knew that “date night” was special—that they should leave Mom and Dad alone (doing whatever it was that adults do out there by the fire with their mugs of wine, laughing about who knows what) and get themselves to bed. It never seemed to go smoothly. The boys stuck their heads out the window, whisper-screaming “Where’s the toothpaste?” or “He hit me!” The baby would wake up. Sometimes it rained, but the couple would sit out there anyway, with their hoods up, laughing about it all—date night in the rain, outside under the cloudy sky, in the winter, in a pandemic.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">For both, work pressures would threaten to get in the way. Vanessa was a freelance graphic artist and frequently had to push into the wee hours to meet deadlines. Carlos, a middle school math teacher, had to get up at 5:00 a.m. to grade tests before class. But at a certain point they made a pact: they wouldn’t skip their once-a-week date night, no matter what.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">“Yeah, I missed a couple of deadlines,” says Vanessa. “It was stressful. A couple of times I got some blowback at work. But it was worth it. Something had to give. And I just decided, it wasn’t going to be my marriage.”</p>
			<h2 class="x05-Head-A"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_139" role="doc-pagebreak" title="139"/>Protect It at All Costs</h2>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text-FL">Many couples make a plan to start doing a regular date night, and then struggle to make it happen. When the business of life ramps up, it’s the first thing on the chopping block.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Something will always try to snatch away date night: a looming work deadline, difficulty finding a babysitter, or a feeling of bone-tired exhaustion. So let us make it easy for you: <i>This is a requirement</i>. Picture us writing you a doctor’s note, a prescription signed and dated, which must be urgently filled for your health. Get used to saying no to others who try to make demands on the small amount (relatively speaking!) of time you’ve reserved for your sweetheart.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">Making a firm commitment to date night is like setting up a fortress for the two of you against the constant onslaught of the world—all the demands and deadlines and to-do tasks; the churn of chores and errands, even the deeply worthwhile pursuits that you have dedicated yourself to, whether in your career or in parenting, or both. This time is not extra. It’s not a bonus or a reward. It’s an investment. And the fact that it’s fun does not make it frivolous. It <i>should</i> be fun. The <i>fun</i> is how date night works its magic.</p>
			<p class="x04-Body-Text">A regular, nonnegotiable, come-hell-or-high-water date night is one of the interventions we recommend to couples most frequently. Why? <i>Because it works.</i> After all the data we’ve collected, and all the thousands of couples we’ve worked with one-on-one, we’ve seen which adjustments to the “levers” of life really <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_140" role="doc-pagebreak" title="140"/>make a difference—and this is one of the most powerful. If you don’t have time for date night, make the time. Yes—we’re suggesting that you make time. Manifest it out of thin air if you have to! Cancel something. Leave the dishes in the sink. Let the work emails wait. This is more important.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>