<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-21">
		<div>
			<aside>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title-2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_141" role="doc-pagebreak" title="141"/>TODAY’S PRACTICE</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Title">DECLARE A DATE NIGHT—NO EXCUSES!</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Today, invite your partner on a spur of the moment mini-date. A “date” doesn’t have to mean a fancy dinner and a babysitter. It can happen in the backyard in the rain. It can happen on your porch.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">The Ground Rules for Date Night</p>
				<ul>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">No screens! No phones. No Netflix. This is real-life, human face time.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Don’t drink too much! Bonding over a glass or two of wine is just fine. But don’t imbibe to the point where you’re not yourself anymore.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Make sure you’re both on board with the plan! This is a joint endeavor. Everyone should be into it.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Don’t assume it’s going to end in sex. Too much pressure.</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">If one person needs to vent and talk about what’s stressing them out, be open to that. Tonight does not have to be perfect or go in any particular way. There will be other date nights. (Like next week, since you’re making this a habit, right?)</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Don’t make it a social engagement. Just the two of you!</p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Nervous because you haven’t really talked to each other in a week, a month, a year, um . . . a decade? <i class="Box_ITAL">Do it anyway.</i></p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_142" role="doc-pagebreak" title="142"/>Use some open-ended questions to get things rolling. <i class="Box_ITAL">What’s on your mind? What are you feeling happy about these days? What was your low point this week? What are you longing for right now?</i></p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Express interest and curiosity. <i class="Box_ITAL">Tell me more about that. Keep going! What else happened?</i></p>
					</li>
					<li class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">
						<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-List-Bulleted-Para">Finally: <i class="Box_ITAL">keep it simple.</i> The emphasis here is not on where you are, or how elaborate the meal. It’s on conversation. Time. Touch. Intimacy. The two of you together, wherever you are.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-A">Troubleshooting</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Head-B-No-Space">Not sure what to do for a spontaneous, last-minute date?</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text-FL">Just switch up your regular routine ever so slightly for a whiff of adventure and newness. Break out a special treat you’ve been saving and share it. Put on some music that makes you feel close, nostalgic, festive. Especially if you’re whipping up a date night at home, in your usual environment, anything that signals “<i class="Box_ITAL">this time is different/special</i>” will help put up a protective bubble around the intimate space of date night.</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">Julie says: “My parents used to have a date where they’d turn off all the lights, light candles, and sit on the living room floor and eat at the coffee table—just for something different and romantic.”</p>
				<p class="x10-Sidebar-Box-Text">And if you feel like it, dress up! Even if you’re not leaving <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_143" role="doc-pagebreak" title="143"/>the house. Put on your nice clothes and get out the fancy glasses. Why not? It brings a special-occasion air to even the most mundane of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_144" role="doc-pagebreak" title="144"/>weeknights.</p>
			</aside>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>