<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Acknowledgments, The Love Prescription</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780525508137_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:76beed1a-a6c8-46df-b276-0086d783d452" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body id="x9780525508137_EPUB-24">
		<div>
			<h1 class="x13-BM-Head" id="_idParaDest-26"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_171" role="doc-pagebreak" title="171"/>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</h1>
			<p class="x13-BM-Ack-First">We want to thank Doug Abrams, visionary founder of Idea Architects, and his brilliant wife, Dr. Rachel Carlton Abrams, who have honored us with their friendship and devotion to doing good in the world. You both are life-changers for millions, and for us. This book could not have been written without the eloquent wordsmithing of Alyssa Knickerbocker, the editing and leadership of Rachel Neumann, Lara Love, and the terrific work of the entire IA team.</p>
			<p class="x13-BM-Ack">We are also eternally grateful to Edward Sargent, who has taken over the helm of the Gottman Institute with incisive clear-eyed leadership and skill. Thank you, Captain P., our trusted dear friend. In addition, thanks go to our Institute’s research director, Carrie Cole, and our clinical director, Donald Cole, who are not only brilliant psychologists but also our cherished Seattle housemates and friends. Thank you for supporting us throughout the writing of this book. Profound thanks also go to the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_172" role="doc-pagebreak" title="172"/>entire Institute team, without whom we’d still be cave dwelling in our offices.</p>
			<p class="x13-BM-Ack">We want to give kudos and our deep appreciation to Rafael Lisitsa, our dear friend, cofounder, and treasured leader of Affective Software, Inc. (ASI), a sister company of the Gottman Institute that has created a web-based platform and new home for all our relationship work. Profound gratitude also goes to Vladimir Brayman, chief technology officer of ASI, whose energy, dedication, and wondrous brain power are beyond measure. Thanks also to the entire ASI team, especially Inna Brayman, Connor Eaton, and Steven Fan, who have helped us to create and clarify the tools found here.</p>
			<p class="x13-BM-Ack">We also acknowledge our closest friends who have supported us throughout our writing of this book: Alison Shaw and Dick Jager, Phil and Cara Cohn, Mavis Tsai, and Lana Lisitsa. This book’s content would have been impossible to create without John’s five decades of friendship and close collaboration with Robert Levenson. Thank you, all.</p>
			<p class="x13-BM-Ack">Finally, we extend our deepest love and gratitude to Moriah, Steven, and Ezra Fan-Gottman, who show us daily how beautiful love and family can be.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>