<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 8: Reflect and reset at the end of the day</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 182. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_182" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch8"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch8">8</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch8">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch8"><b><i>Reflect and reset</i> at the end of the day</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">D</span>o you ever have moments when you look at your bed, fantasising about getting into it and drifting off to sleep? The thought is so tantalising: no noise, no interruptions, no one needing you (unless you have young children – sorry!). Just rest and sleep. Time to get away from it all for a few hours. It’s an escape. It’s a time to recharge. It sets you up for the next day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Every piece of research on sleep highlights its positive impact on our wellbeing. But sadly, not everyone finds sleep easy. Many people go to bed stressed and exhausted. Sleep is often interrupted as the unconscious mind works through all the unresolved issues of the day. <span aria-label="page 183. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_183" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Many of the stresses of the day become the stresses of the night, and somehow, in the loneliness of night, they can feel insurmountable. This leads to a heighted state of alert. Sleep isn’t fully utilised, and this has a detrimental impact on physical and mental health. People are not ending their day in a healthy way and the consequence is insomnia.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Earlier in the book I mentioned rolling out of bed and autopiloting through the day. We addressed this with your <b>ready</b> practice. The same issue presents itself at night-time. Many people roll into bed and don’t switch off. It’s like sleeping in a car on a motorway with the engine running on full throttle.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For some of us, unless we work through and let go of the day’s events, sleep will prove a challenge. We are sleeping with many people, and negative events and situations, in our beds! We are literally ‘sleeping with the enemy’.</p>
<p class="indent_para">How many times have you ruminated on your day for hours while trying to sleep? How many times have you got up and out of bed because you forgot to defrost the chicken? How many times have you logged in to your email on your phone because you forgot to reply to someone? How many times have you decided to watch another episode of something on Netflix? (I’m guilty of all of these.)</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 184. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_184" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I worked with a woman several years back who worried a lot about other people’s perceptions of her. She described going to bed and replaying the events of the day, trying to figure out if she had offended, upset or disappointed anyone. During one of our sessions, she started to name some of the people she would spend her time thinking about. It came to around twenty people. I remember saying to her, ‘That’s a lot of people in your head to take to bed every night.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">‘It sure is. It’s an orgy!’ We laughed at that but the point was that there was no space for her to rest or recharge. She was ‘on’ all the time. And that’s not sustainable long term, for any of us.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If this sounds familiar, then maybe it’s time for a change.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Which takes us to the final part of your daily practice: <b>reflect and reset</b>. Forget your bedtime hot chocolate. If you want to really unwind, it’s all about bedtime therapy.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW DOES IT WORK?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">As with your morning and lunchtime practice, I am mindful of time. And while this practice <i>is</i> brief – just three minutes before bed (but not actually <i>in</i> your bed) – it is jam-packed with useful content. <span aria-label="page 185. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_185" role="doc-pagebreak"/>(As before, if you want to spend longer on this part of your practice, that’s fine, too.) I want to encourage you again to do your one-minute grounding exercise – your psychological stretching – before you start.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If sleeping is an issue, you might want to consider using the grounding technique after your practice too, once you’re in bed, to help you drift off to sleep.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For this part of your daily practice, I suggest you find a space where you won’t be interrupted, either in your bedroom or somewhere else that’s quiet. But, as I say, not actually in bed. The reason why I say to avoid doing your practice in bed is because you risk falling asleep, and you don’t get all the benefits of the therapy, which could potentially have a knock-on effect on the quality of your sleep that night.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For this part of your self-therapy, in the absence of a qualified therapist to speak to, you will be writing all the words you would ordinarily say in a therapy session in a notepad instead. This is your means of ‘processing’.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Arrange nearby a small bowl of water, and a towel or tissues. The final part of your practice will be a cathartic exercise to ‘wash away’ the day, which I’ll explain more about later. But don’t worry. This isn’t going to be anything weird and wacky. It’s just something I do myself at the end of a session with a client that I’d like to pass on to the therapist part of you.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 186. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_186" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Our focus for this third and final session will be on three areas:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 8 | Journalling and letting go</p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 9 | Lessons of the day</p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 10 | Cleansing, energising and ending the day</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent_para">I’ll be giving you some things to <i>think</i> about, things to <i>talk</i> about and things to <i>do</i> during this session.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Again, don’t worry if you can’t do this whole session in three minutes. As with all practice, it will get easier with time, eventually becoming second nature.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Before we begin, a quick cautionary note that is particularly applicable to this, your end-of-day session, but applies to all sessions, day and night.</p>
<p class="indent_para">One of the rules of therapy is that you never work with a client if they are intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or illegal mood-altering substances (prescribed drugs are excluded here). This is because the brain of a person under the influence can’t process information properly. <span aria-label="page 187. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_187" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I say this to protect and support you, and completely without judgement. Therapeutic techniques are only helpful when all parties are in a sober, rational, receptive state.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 8: JOURNALLING AND LETTING GO</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">There are many ways of journalling but I’m going to suggest a very short, specific approach. I use this approach because it helps my clients extract the nuggets of important information from their experiences, and prevents them from writing long passages of unhelpful ruminative rambling prose that holds no therapeutic value. It also means you don’t exceed your allotted three minutes of self-therapy time, and you get a proper night’s sleep!</p>
<p class="indent_para">During this first exercise, we’ll be identifying the moments of your day that have caused you distress or upset. These can include those moments in the first half of your day that you identified in Minute 5 of your lunchtime <b>steady</b> practice, if they’re still playing on your mind. Then we’ll look at how to let go of these moments.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 188. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_188" role="doc-pagebreak"/>You may be wondering if revisiting distressing moments from the day is a sensible idea at bedtime. I believe it is. If we don’t process and move on from the events of the day, then we carry them with us, which has a damaging cumulative effect.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’d like you to recollect the stressful or upsetting events from the day in quite a structured way:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><b>Event:</b> <span class="num-font">write down an account of what happened, attempting to stay objective and as close to the facts as possible</span></li>
<li class="num-gt"><b>Interpretation:</b> <span class="num-font">write down how you’ve interpreted what happened, or what you’ve come away from the event believing</span></li>
<li class="num-gt"><b>Consequences:</b> <span class="num-font">write down what impact your interpretation of the events is having on your thoughts, your emotions, your wellbeing and your ability to fall asleep right now, in this moment</span></li>
<li class="num-gt"><b>Closure:</b> <span class="num-font">write down the thinking traps you’ve identified that you’re falling into, write down the evidence to support your negative thought patterns, write down the helpful alternative thought you’re replacing the unhelpful thought with, <span aria-label="page 189. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_189" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and, finally let go of the negative thought</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">Here’s an example of how this might work in practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Pam has a meeting with a colleague who reports into her, where she broaches his poor work performance. This leads to a disagreement where he walks out of her office and calls her a ‘rubbish manager’. Her actions are justified, but she feels upset. This is the <b>event</b>. Later that evening, Pam writes in her journal:</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><i><b>Event:</b> Argument with work colleague</i></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Pam worries about this event for the rest of the day. As she is going to bed, she is aware of self-doubt creeping in. She notes a belief, ‘I shouldn’t upset people,’ taking shape in her mind. This is her <b>interpretation</b>. Pam writes in her journal:</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><i><b>Interpretation:</b> I can’t upset people</i></p>
<p class="noindent_para">She is aware that she is overthinking and worrying, and she becomes anxious about going to work the next day. She is also worried that she won’t sleep. These are the <b>consequences</b>. Pam writes in her journal:</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><span aria-label="page 190. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_190" role="doc-pagebreak"/><i><b>Consequences:</b> Anxiety, insomnia</i></p>
<p class="noindent_para">She switches into ‘therapy-mode’ and identifies that she’s fallen into her old thinking patterns of people-pleasing and being overly concerned about what others think. She considers the evidence. It was her duty to bring up the quality of her colleague’s work, and she is helping neither him nor herself by staying silent. She gets great results at work, she was promoted recently and she gets on well with her other colleagues. She is a good manager. She can rationally deduce that her actions were valid, and she is able to let the event go. This is her <b>closure</b>. Pam writes in her journal:</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><i><b>Closure</b>: Old pattern activated – I can let go. I did the right thing</i>.</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Pam’s situation is typical of what plays out in many of our day-to-day lives. We do the ‘right’ thing but then self-doubt, self-blaming, or self-deprecating thoughts based on old rules, beliefs, or experiences emerge. When you can see this dysfunctional pattern for what it is, everything changes. You unlearn old beliefs, discover freedom and strength, and build new foundations. You begin to trust yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It is worth remembering that you are not responsible for how other people react to you. There are moments when it is right to be honest. There are moments when it is right to challenge people. <span aria-label="page 191. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_191" role="doc-pagebreak"/>There are moments when you can say no. Your purpose in this world is not to keep everyone happy. Your primary purpose as a human being is to honour and respect yourself. When this happens, life happens from a place of stability and authenticity.</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts">Now you understand the process and the format of this evening’s self-therapy, it’s time to reflect on and work through the tougher moments of your day. Don’t repress them or tell yourself you’re not <i>really</i> bothered by them, or ignore them and try to push them away. Equally, don’t allow them to run rampant through your mind as you lie in bed. Deal with them. This new habit will help you create healthier new patterns, rationally letting go and detaching from that which doesn’t serve you well.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you have completed your journal for the day, read back over each event in turn. Then, one at a time, make a conscious decision to let each event go.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We all carry too much ‘stuff’ around. We misinterpret, we get stuck in unhelpful thought cycles and we fret way too much. This exercise helps you to break free of that. What a powerful way to end your day and enter sleep.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Before you move on to the next stage of your practice, just pause for breath. Visualise all the concerns and worries of the day drifting away. <span aria-label="page 192. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_192" role="doc-pagebreak"/>You don’t need to carry them anymore. You’re ready to move on to the next stage: extracting the lessons from the day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 9: LESSONS OF THE DAY</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Life is offering us lessons all the time. Every interaction, event and experience comes with a useful takeaway. But, if you want to benefit from those lessons, you have to be open to learning them, and you need to know how to see them when they arrive.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When it comes to personal development and growth, there’s a lot of unhelpful discourse around these so-called ‘lightbulb moments’. This discourse tends to promote the idea that lessons come to us in the form of extraordinary Nirvana-like epiphanies and signs: the bigger, the better.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As a young Catholic boy, I was brought on many pilgrimages to shrines honouring the Virgin Mary. Let me preface this by saying that these pilgrimages bring hope to millions of people, and my intention here is not to be disrespectful of anyone’s beliefs. Rather, I tell this story to make a point.</p>
<p class="indent_para">One such shrine was in the Republic of Ireland, <span aria-label="page 193. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_193" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and my late mum would take me and my brothers on a six-hour coach journey to watch the ‘moving statue’. The statue was meant to not only move, but cry. We would sit up all night, exhausted, waiting for the statue to move. It was often summertime when we went on these pilgrimages. But it was Ireland so it was cold and wet. As you can imagine, if you had fifty or sixty people deliriously tired, sitting out in the cold watching a statue, then eventually someone was bound to see something moving. And they did.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Not only did the statue move and cry but there were also reports of it waving. The moving statue would also invite a few guests along, including Jesus and some well-known saints. It was quite the celestial celebrity bash.</p>
<p class="indent_para">People would leave elated because they had had signs of ‘something bigger’. They believed they were being blessed and gifted with lessons: Jesus saw them, He saw everything they did and did not do, their belief in Him would be rewarded in Heaven, He forgave them, they were good people, they had value. I believed I would catch pneumonia and one day write a book called <i>The Moving Statue</i> (watch out for that one). But my point is a serious one: our fellow pilgrims were looking to the extraordinary for an inspiring lesson. But the most powerful lessons are often in the ordinary. <span aria-label="page 194. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_194" role="doc-pagebreak"/>They are in the simple moments. They are in moments of silence. They emerge when you listen. They emerge when you see without judgement. They are in the ‘cup of tea’ moments. They are the stranger who smiles at you at the bus stop. They are a friend who calls when you need it most. They are in disappointment, failure and letdowns. Lessons are everywhere. They are the moments that move you forward, help you understand, prompt decisions and help you find clarity. They are those unexplainable moments when something lands, and suddenly it feels right.</p>
<p class="indent_para">These moments are sadly often lost. In my experience this happens when we:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Stop listening</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Seek answers in the wrong places</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Close ourselves off to new possibilities</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Forget what matters</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Live on autopilot, not seeing beyond to the greater purpose of our lives</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW CAN YOU FIND THESE LESSONS?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">I want to be clear: the lessons I’m talking about here aren’t necessarily practical. They’re not the answers to questions like, <i>How can I make more money? How can I get that promotion? How can I look ten years younger?</i> These lessons are deeper and are more profound than that. <span aria-label="page 195. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_195" role="doc-pagebreak"/>You might learn what makes you truly happy (and that it’s not what you expected). You might realise how much a particular person enhances your life, or how much another detracts from it. You might discover how much more resilient your children are than you’d realised, or that they are teaching you just as much as you are teaching them. You may get some insight into your partner’s deepest fears and discover that you have the power to allay those fears. A moment of kindness from an unexpected source might remind you that humankind is good. You might realise that you’re not being true to yourself in some way.</p>
<p class="indent_para">During the second minute of your evening self-therapy, cast your mind back to your foundation work – your areas of struggle, your story, your rules, your ways of thinking, your emotional and behavioural patterns and what matters to you, and ask yourself this simple question:</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT DID LIFE TEACH ME TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Try to pinpoint the moments when you felt strong emotions. What thoughts were you having throughout the day? Were some old beliefs triggered? Did you, <span aria-label="page 196. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_196" role="doc-pagebreak"/>or someone you interacted with, speak or behave in a way that runs counter to your values? Did any moments or events stand out?</p>
<p class="indent_para">Just allow space to pause, and let the information come. Try not to force it too much. The answers will flow if you stop and listen.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m going to share with you now the lessons I took from my own practice yesterday in the hope they’re helpful.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I was extremely tired going to bed, and I noticed as I checked in with myself that my mood was a little ‘flat’. I’d just finished watching a film in which the main character’s horse dies. She grieves for the animal deeply. I found it upsetting to watch.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When it came to considering what lessons I could take from the day, I realised that my ‘feeling flat’ was my own grief. Both my dog and a close friend died a few months ago. I miss them both. My life has been incredibly busy since these losses. My lesson was that I am not giving myself enough space to grieve. This was an important lesson for me to be reminded of.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Life was teaching me. But I would not have been aware of these lessons unless I had created the space to stop for my end-of-day practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Lessons can be positive reminders of the importance of gratitude and appreciation. Equally they can be signposts to tweaks or changes that need to happen in your life.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 197. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_197" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Stay open and curious, and let your life teach you. There are many treasures to be found.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 10: CLEANSING, ENERGISING AND ENDING THE DAY</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">You have arrived at the final minute of your daily practice. This is where you will cleanse, energise and close your day. Your day is complete, and you are now ready for sleep before beginning another day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">CLEANSING</p>
<p class="noindent_para">This isn’t a ritual taught in formal therapy training, but it is popular in healing practices. A supervisor of mine showed me how to incorporate it into the end of my sessions many years ago. He believes that immersion in water enables the therapist to let go of the challenging aspects of work done in the previous session, so they’re able to start the next session with a renewed sense of energy and a clean slate.</p>
<p class="indent_para">While I appreciate this is self-therapy rather than therapy with another individual, <span aria-label="page 198. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_198" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I think you’ll nevertheless find this ritual valuable. I’ll explain how it works.</p>
<p class="indent_para">All you need is a small bowl of water, enough to wash your hands in.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Immerse your hands in the water. As you bathe your hands, visualise cleansing away any negativity, anger and resentment from your day. You are letting your day go.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This end-of-day cleansing ritual is a healthy way to self-soothe, enter ‘reset mode’ and reinforce the idea that negative influences will not be interrupting your sleep. You are giving yourself permission to let the day go, and this will bring you a sense of peace and contentment.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s also an act of honour. Cleansing rituals are popular in a variety of cultures all over the world, where they’re considered a traditional way of honouring and looking after yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You may have heard the expression, <i>Namaste: The light in me recognises the light in you</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You are recognising the light in yourself.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">ENERGISING</p>
<p class="noindent_para">In this, the second part of the final minute of your daily practice, I would like you to endeavour to connect with something bigger than yourself. <span aria-label="page 199. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_199" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Bear with me here. This doesn’t have to mean religion, or a god (but it can do). It can mean the solar system, for instance. Looking up at the stars, contemplating the beauty of our world, the miracle – the almost mathematical impossibility – of your very existence, has a powerful effect. It can give you some serious perspective. The knowledge that all your problems are tiny microscopic dots in the context of all of space-time? It’s very freeing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whether it be karma, fate and destiny, Mother Nature, Wicca, enlightenment, ancient wisdom, energy, the laws of the universe, or simply some unknowable, unexplained and unexplainable higher power, whatever you feel most attuned to, find a way to connect with it.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Why do I ask you to connect with a belief or with something bigger than you? Because it’s impossible, and frankly irresponsible in my line of work, to ignore the findings of multiple research papers within the field of psychology which indicate that people with a belief in something, whatever that something is, cope better in times of adversity and manage mental health issues better than people with no belief systems. Some form of spirituality or a belief in an energy source can be a useful psychological tool. (There is a flip side here, of course, when it comes to religion specifically. <span aria-label="page 200. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_200" role="doc-pagebreak"/>People who are shamed by their religions tend to struggle <i>more</i> during difficult times. Something to bear in mind.)</p>
<p class="indent_para">My interest in energy comes from my years of working with people living with terminal illnesses and approaching death. Many of these people described discovering a sense of peace and contentment after relinquishing control of their journey to God, Allah, Mohammed, Buddha and so on. Outside of religious practices, this is described as trusting in the universe, light, energy, nature and so on. Whatever the context, I have witnessed first-hand how much this has helped people during a time that could otherwise have been very distressing. What is the appeal? What links all of these belief systems together? The relief of being granted permission to let go. The liberating knowledge that you cannot control anything, and your life is in the hands of something or someone else. It’s the energy you receive from a source far greater than yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">So, whatever helps you go beyond yourself in this moment, I suggest you connect to it and practise the art of handing over control and allowing yourself to be energised. If it helps get you into the right frame of mind, you could start by visualising something awe-inspiring such as a mountain range or the ocean. You could listen to a sound that transports you elsewhere, <span aria-label="page 201. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_201" role="doc-pagebreak"/>such as rainfall or birdsong, or a piece of classical music. You could start with a prayer if that’s what you’d prefer. It could be anything. The only condition is that you relinquish control to the bigger force, and that you are open to allowing this moment to energise you.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">ENDING THE DAY</p>
<p class="noindent_para">The <b>reflect and reset</b> stage of your daily self-therapy is complete.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You have, in three minutes:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Journalled about, and let go of, the moments of your day that have caused you distress or upset</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Discovered the lessons that life has taught you today</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Cleansed away the negative aspects of your day</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Allowed yourself to be energised by a higher source</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">I’d like you now to pass the final part of your daily practice in absolute stillness and quiet. You are acknowledging the day with the power of silence. You are allowing silence to prepare your mind for sleep. <span aria-label="page 202. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_202" role="doc-pagebreak"/>There is nothing to do here. There are no actions. There are no more reflections.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It is time for you to enter a deeper stillness through sleep.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You have woven ten minutes of therapy into your day. This time steadies you. It enables you to cope well with whatever unique challenges your day brings. It allows you to live an authentic, honest life. It empowers you to live more fully.</p>
<p class="indent_para">These ten minutes have the potential to be the most powerful of your day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Make them count.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>