<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 1: What is this therapy malarky?</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 15. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_15" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch1"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch1">1</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch1">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch1"><b>What is this therapy malarky?</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">I</span>’m going to teach you to become your own therapist and make therapy part of your life for ten minutes every day. But before I do that, I’d like to talk about the shame and stigma surrounding therapy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m always intrigued when I meet a new client who says to me at the end of a session, ‘Wow, that wasn’t so bad.’ (It’s usually men.) I always ask what they mean, as the preconceptions surrounding therapy fascinate me and, as you might expect, I’ve heard a range of responses back. Brace yourself!</p>
<div class="blockquote1">
<p class="extract-hang"><span aria-label="page 16. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_16" role="doc-pagebreak"/>‘You seem like a normal guy for a therapist.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘It wasn’t as weird as I expected.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘I’m surprised we laughed.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘It wasn’t all, “How did that make you feel?”’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘You didn’t seem shocked by what I said.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘You didn’t hypnotise me.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘I thought you would just nod your head and say, “I understand.”’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘It made more sense than I expected.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘It wasn’t all tears and feelings.’</p>
<p class="extract-hang">‘I was expecting you to be a tw*t.’ (And variations on that theme.)</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent_para">It doesn’t stop there. I sometimes avoid telling people in social settings what I do for a living. I find my occupation often either worries people (they think I’m mind-reading or ‘diagnosing’ them based on our small talk), or makes them feel the need to disclose their entire life story, or it freaks them out.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When I worked as a clinical lead for an NHS therapy service, I learnt that some words associated with mental health stopped people attending groups. For example, if we set up a group called ‘Coping with Depression’, it would be empty. If we set up a group called ‘Boost Your Mood’, it would be full. <span aria-label="page 17. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_17" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I work with clients who ask me to remove the word ‘therapist’ from the invoice. I have even been asked to remove my title from the office door. Some patients are concerned about what others might think if they knew they were seeing a therapist. A medical doctor specialising in the body rather than the mind would be unlikely to get the same request, unless it was in an area like sexual health. Therapists seem to be something of a ‘dirty secret’.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I remember going for my first therapy session in my early twenties (a few years ago now), sneaking up the road, terrified someone would see me. I had the look of someone engaging in an illicit affair. Luckily my first therapist was a nun, dispelling any such potential rumours. Her office was in a convent. I was relieved when I discovered this because it was a useful cover-up. I could be at a confession of sorts!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Being serious, though, I was ashamed that I needed help. I was ashamed that I couldn’t work it out alone. I was concerned what others would think of me. I was ashamed I was struggling mentally with ‘coming out’. This was complicated further with a cultural belief at the time, a belief which I’d internalised, that men don’t struggle. Boys don’t cry.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Which brings me to this. <i>A lot of people consider it shameful to need therapy</i>. I used to be one of those people! There is <i>still</i> a degree of stigma around mental ill health. <span aria-label="page 18. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_18" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Making the responsible choice to be in therapy is <i>still</i> considered a sign of weakness or a failing. Likewise, therapists and therapy are <i>still</i> quite mysterious to some people. Sadly, these negative preconceptions are mostly driven by fear. Public perception of therapy is a lot more positive now than it was one or two decades ago. More people <i>are</i> coming forward for help. But that stigma is still very much around.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If you’re feeling even a hint of this discomfort and anxiety I’m talking about, please let me help allay any nervousness you might have right now.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The truth is, despite the ongoing shame around it, every single person on the planet would benefit from some therapy. Even if you’re perfectly content with your life, gaining the self-knowledge to understand <i>why</i> you’re happy means you can re-discover what makes you tick when life is less than rosy. Everyone, no matter how wonderful their life might seem from the outside, will experience some seriously tough times, and it’s not easy navigating those ups and downs. Sometimes we need support. That’s why in this book, you will learn:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">What therapy does to your brain, and how it helps, in a nutshell</li>
<li class="bull1">The process of therapy in more detail</li>
<li class="bull1">What you’ll be doing in self-therapy</li>
</ul>
<div><span aria-label="page 19. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_19" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT THERAPY DOES TO YOUR BRAIN, AND HOW IT HELPS, IN A NUTSHELL</p>
<p class="noindent_para">I have worked for thirty years with people in distress. And what I’ve learnt in that time is that it’s the <i>response</i> to a negative experience, rather than the experience itself, that has the biggest psychological impact. Some people cope well and adjust to horrible experiences. Some people suffer deeply.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I don’t believe people choose to suffer. I believe some people are programmed to suffer more than others, or get stuck in unhelpful patterns of behaviour.</p>
<p class="indent_para">How much a person suffers because of their response to negative experiences could be linked to how they think, how they deal with emotions, what rules they have in place for their life or how they behave. Most of these patterns are learnt or inherited as children and then carried into adulthood. You will learn more about this later.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In essence, a lot of adults are going through life using childhood coping strategies. And that, in my experience, is the root of much human distress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The good news is therapy can change that, as thousands of research papers can attest to. Therapy means standing outside of your life and having a look inside, but doing so objectively. You can make fascinating discoveries about yourself when you play the formative events of your life back and begin to understand why you struggle. <span aria-label="page 20. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_20" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Therapy will encourage you to tell your life story and connect your experiences to what you struggle with today. It will help you understand patterns of thought, automated emotional responses, why you behave as you do and how you can change what keeps you stuck.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Each day in my practice I see people trying to manage issues such as anxiety, depression, trauma, loss, relationship issues and conflict. Therapy helps them unravel the cause of their pain and offers guidance that can ease their suffering. It is a collaborative process rather than a prescriptive one.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The joy of modern therapy is that it uses strategies informed by the latest cutting-edge research in medicine, neuroscience, social sciences and pharmacology. That is to say, we are complex physical, emotional, thinking beings, and we need more than psychological insights to help us function at our best. Good therapy should always be holistic in its approach, by which I mean it should consider the whole person.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 21. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_21" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">LET’S LOOK AT THE FACTS ABOUT THERAPY:</p>
<ol class="order-graya" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It is a scientifically proven method of improving mental wellness</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It improves brain chemistry</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It can reprogram neuropathways to help a person function in more helpful ways</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It improves quality of life</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It improves mood and anxiety issues</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It improves work life, home life and general motivation</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It helps people break the cycle of destructive behavioural patterns</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">It eases distress</span></li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">THE PROCESS OF THERAPY: UNDERSTANDING THE MECHANICS IN MORE DETAIL</p>
<p class="noindent_para">As I mentioned, I’m going to give you a therapy crash course. Think of it like a compressed version of the work I would ordinarily do with a client. This foundation work is essential. Then we’ll move on to the maintenance work: the ten minutes a day of self-therapy. I’ve deliberately chosen ten minutes, partly because quick acts of self-care can fit more easily into busy schedules, <span aria-label="page 22. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_22" role="doc-pagebreak"/>but also because you’ve a better chance of committing to the self-therapy long term if it’s a much more achievable ten minutes, as opposed to an hour.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I want to explain the basics of how therapy works by using the analogy of a cake with three layers.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The processes I explain here will come alive when you are doing the actual work. For now, though, I hope this analogy will offer some insight into why I suggest the exercises I do. Just know that if I am suggesting you try something, there will be a strong clinical reason for doing so – we’ll cover that in more detail shortly.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The top layer of the cake is your thoughts and feelings. Your thoughts and your feelings are separate but interconnected, and they’re constantly communicating with each other. For example, if the rather unwelcome thought, ‘My partner doesn’t care about me,’ crops up in your mind, it will automatically create a feeling of sadness or something similar.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Likewise, you may experience a sudden shift in your emotional state that leads to a catalogue of unhelpful thoughts. When you are sad, it may prove difficult to have optimistic thoughts about yourself or your life. Thoughts may sound more like, ‘I’m not good enough,’ ‘I’m a disappointment’ or ‘I’m rubbish.’</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 23. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_23" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Thinking is a cognitive process. Sometimes it’s automated and unconscious. You could be working and suddenly your mind jumps to a memory of a holiday. Sometimes it’s conscious. For example, you might be wondering what to buy at the supermarket, or the best route to a wedding next weekend, or considering how to proceed with a delicate contractual negotiation. Thoughts come with a narrative, with one thought often leading to another.</p>
<p class="indent_para">An emotion, on the other hand, is an automated (that is to say, automatic) experience that you <i>feel</i>. Thoughts may or may not be attached. It may be in response to an event. It may happen unexpectedly. Our emotions are like the weather, they can fluctuate between two extremes in a very short space of time. Learning to acknowledge them and letting them guide you is key.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Neuroscientists estimate that we have between 60,000 to 80,000 thoughts a day! That explains the expression ‘a mind in overdrive’! We are thinking all the time. But thinking itself isn’t the problem.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The problem is that critical, catastrophic or inflexible ways of thinking, and negative emotional responses, often become automatic. We’ve learnt them from our early life experiences. For example, if someone comes from a family with very critical parents, they may automatically think the worst of themselves and struggle with negative thoughts when they are in situations that mirror aspects of their childhood. <span aria-label="page 24. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_24" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Consequently, regulating emotions may prove a problem.</p>
<p class="indent_para">By that same token, someone could have learnt as a child that some emotions aren’t acceptable, such as anger, fear or vulnerability. They may struggle as an adult dealing with these emotions, and consequently experience negative thought patterns whenever these emotions arise.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ve worked with many clients who weren’t given permission to show vulnerability as children. When they are in situations that evoke difficult-to-handle emotions as an adult, they automatically have very critical thoughts about themselves, such as, ‘I shouldn’t be feeling this way,’ ‘I am weak’ or ‘I am useless.’ In short, they have been programmed to respond in a particular way in certain scenarios due to their early life experiences.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Automated thinking and emotional responses tend to be habitual. Unless, of course, we stop to evaluate how they are negatively impacting our life and make a conscious effort to change our responses. Therapy brings hope here. New ways of thinking and healthier emotional responses can be opted for. Change is possible.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But good therapy won’t just focus on the top layer of the cake. <span aria-label="page 25. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_25" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Sure, that’s fine for a quick fix in the emotions and thoughts department. But if you want the secret to <i>long-lasting</i> change? You need to look at those middle and bottom layers too, as both these layers directly impact our thoughts and feelings.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s look at that middle layer. This one’s interesting. It’s the rules and beliefs that we inherit from families, culture, religion, gender and every formative experience we have. It dictates (either consciously or subconsciously) how we think we ought to be living our lives. It’s less visible than the top layer, and more ingrained.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We learn very early in life that if we’re going to fit in, belong, be safe, be taken seriously, be accepted, and so on, we need to ‘play the game’. Playing the game means sticking with our inherited rules and beliefs. These are the prerequisites for acceptance into society, or so we’re led to believe. These prerequisites will look different for every person, depending on their situation. But the ones that I see crop up again and again are perfection, success, reliability, selflessness, being a good person, being in control and being emotionally ‘strong’. I also hear lots of clients talk about how important it is that they’re not considered needy, weak, vulnerable, opinionated, a failure or a disappointment.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In theory, there is nothing wrong with having rules and beliefs around what constitutes ‘functioning well’ in life, <span aria-label="page 26. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_26" role="doc-pagebreak"/>especially if they work and don’t cause distress. The middle layer of the cake is an important part of the structure after all. But the problem is, rules and beliefs are often inflexible. And inflexibility is a difficult force to reckon with.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If your personal rules dictate that you <i>must</i> be perfect, good, successful and so on, then life will be a challenge. No one can be all of those things all of the time. Likewise, if you believe it is your duty to please people, that you should <i>never</i> disappoint others, <i>always</i> be the best and so on, then life will be a challenge. You are human. Rigid, inflexible rules and beliefs will cause distress, which will manifest in negative thoughts and emotions.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Think of a time when you told yourself that you had to be perfect at something, and it didn’t go to plan. If you have (or had, at the time) inflexible beliefs around perfectionism, then the outcome may have, predictably, been negative, self-critical or self-deprecating thoughts. Your emotions will have been dominated by a sense of not being good enough, of having failed or disappointed others. Your rules and beliefs will have created a thought and emotion distress response.</p>
<p class="indent_para">On the other hand, if you were to have had a more flexible approach to your rules and beliefs, then the scenario could have played out differently. <span aria-label="page 27. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_27" role="doc-pagebreak"/>An imperfect outcome can be managed with compassionate thoughts, for example, ‘I did my best and I can learn from this for next time.’ Emotionally, that’s easier to manage.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Put simply, reviewing, adapting and creating more flexibility with your rules and beliefs will help you unlearn negative automated thoughts and emotions. Therapy can help with this.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s do a quick recap before we move on to the bottom layer of the cake, which is even more interesting.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The top layer of the cake is our thoughts and emotions, which are inextricably connected. These thoughts and emotions are directly affected by the second layer, our rules and beliefs.</p>
<p class="indent_para">On to the third layer. You won’t be surprised to hear that this one influences everything. This is the epicentre of therapy. Our deeper <i>foundation core beliefs</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Different models of therapy will explain this in different ways, but the meaning is the same. Foundation core beliefs are the foundations upon which your entire world view and psychological make-up are based. They can be divided into four main categories and this is how they normally present:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 28. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_28" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Safety and security:</b> Either a belief that you are safe, or a belief that you are not safe</li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Lovability:</b> Either a belief that you are lovable, or a belief that you are not lovable</li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Self-worth:</b> Either a belief that you have value, or a belief that you do not have value</li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Hope:</b> Either feeling hopeful, or feeling hopeless</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">Let’s look at an example. If someone never felt safe or loved as a child, this will influence their belief systems. Rules and beliefs will be focused on staying safe: I must not take risks, I must have a plan, I must have certainty. I should please people, or they may reject me. I must never show vulnerability, or I could be abandoned.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Consequently, this person may also have difficulty with negative or critical patterns of thinking and find managing their emotions challenging. Their life experience has created foundational core beliefs that lead to an unsteady bedrock. This is played out in how the person thinks, feels and reacts to everyday life. None of it is their fault and this is also something therapy seeks to address, in that it not only tackles the primary problems but also any secondary self-blaming or shaming.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 29. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_29" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>WHAT YOU’LL BE DOING IN SELF-THERAPY</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Most people think therapy is going along for a weekly chat, reflecting on life, and hopefully making improvements to their mental wellbeing in order to have a more enjoyable life. If that’s what you’re looking for, this book may not be right for you. I think it’s best we clear that up straight away.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In my experience, most people won’t have breakthroughs unless therapy is an active, collaborative process. For me, talking is just one part of therapy. It is also:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Working between sessions</li>
<li class="bull1">A series of actions, not just words, e.g. changes in behaviour</li>
<li class="bull1">Creating a new model of self-care that teaches you to look after yourself</li>
<li class="bull1">Committing to the process as an ongoing way of life</li>
<li class="bull1">Working with the connections between mind–body emotions</li>
<li class="bull1">A willingness to be challenged</li>
<li class="bull1">A willingness to let go of old patterns</li>
<li class="bull1">Not expecting the therapist to do all the work</li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 30. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_30" role="doc-pagebreak"/>A willingness to be curious and open to a process full of possibilities</li>
<li class="bull1">A willingness to change</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">I’d like to explain why certain strategies that I’ll be encouraging you to use in your self-therapy are helpful:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>Recounting or reflecting on your life:</b></span> this helps you process your experiences (and by ‘process’, I mean, ‘allowing your brain to acknowledge what’s happened and file your memories away in the appropriate place in your brain’).</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span class="gray-color"><b>Action-based activities:</b></span> consolidates what you know and helps change behaviours or patterns.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span class="gray-color"><b>Writing things down:</b></span> makes you more likely to action the changes that are needed.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span class="gray-color"><b>Challenging patterns of thought:</b></span> creates more helpful ways of thinking that will serve you better.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span class="gray-color"><b>Regulating emotions:</b></span> gets you comfortable with all your humanity and prevents you from getting trapped with repressed emotions.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span aria-label="page 31. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_31" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="gray-color"><b>Accepting uncomfortable truths:</b></span> chances are, I’ll have heard several versions of what you’re describing before, and I’ll have learnt a few things that tend to be true when it comes to the situation you’re describing. They can be hard to hear, but it’s so important to face up to uncomfortable truths if you want to move forward.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent_para">As I hope you will discover in your therapy journey, therapy is active, not passive. It’s about how you live, how you move, how you breathe, how you think, how you deal with life, how you react, how you care for yourself, how you treat yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s getting to know yourself. It’s telling your story. It’s understanding your story. It’s knowing what you want. It’s also knowing what you must do to make the changes you need. It’s a revamp of your life.</p> 
</div>
<div class="page"> 
<p class="chap_h2"><b>WHAT’S REQUIRED OF YOU?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I’m going to keep this section short and sweet.</p>
<p class="indent_para">All I ask of you is that you turn up, keep an open mind, trust the process and put the work in. Above all, don’t give yourself a hard time.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 32. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_32" role="doc-pagebreak"/>If you feel you need more help than this book can offer, don’t hesitate to stop, and speak to your doctor or a professional.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Shall we get started? I’d like to know a little more about you.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>