<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 4: OK, what now?</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 84. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_84" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch4"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch4">4</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch4">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch4"><b>Ok, what now?</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">I</span>’m sure you’ve heard of the expression ‘to open Pandora’s box’. According to Greek mythology, this box, once opened, was meant to release all the ills of the world onto mankind. It’s an expression I often hear from people who are hesitant about engaging in therapy. ‘I don’t want to open Pandora’s box. Who knows what will come out?’ They’re understandably concerned that therapy will dredge up painful memories long buried, and they’re sceptical about it ultimately being a healing process. But this concern is unfounded.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The only thing you find when you explore your story is the truth. And as a wise person once said, <span aria-label="page 85. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_85" role="doc-pagebreak"/>‘The truth will set you free.’ Even if you don’t like the truth or the darker side of your story, it will ultimately lead you to a better life. When you find the courage to identify the formative experiences that have made you the person you are today, you will be empowered to reclaim ownership of your life and to discover what changes are needed. And that’s what we’ll be talking about in this chapter: daring to imagine a better future and changing your life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But first, let’s talk about the fear of change that can hold us back from that better future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ll often meet clients who aren’t remotely wary of therapy. They’ll tell me their story no problem, make sense of it, but then freeze. Suddenly they’re faced with the reality that the future can be different from what they’d originally envisioned, and while for some people that can be liberating, for them it’s terrifying!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Selena is a woman I welcomed into my therapy room a few years back. She had been diagnosed with a serious medical condition but thankfully had a very positive prognosis. She was at a crossroads in her life and described her serious illness as a ‘wake-up call’. We got off to a great start in therapy. She was candid, honest, worked hard, didn’t avoid issues and was open to suggestions. But this changed after a few sessions when I asked her, <span aria-label="page 86. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_86" role="doc-pagebreak"/>‘OK <i>what now?</i> What do you want for your future?’ She couldn’t speak and the atmosphere in the room turned cold. I was a little baffled. She had told me her story and got to the bottom of why she struggled in some areas of her life, but she wasn’t able to go any further. My question had clearly upset her, and she decided there and then that therapy wasn’t for her. She didn’t want to continue, not today, not ever. I tried to explore this with her, but she was resistant.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As Selena was about to leave the room, I held the door open for her. I was a little taken aback by her keenness to exit, so, being unsure of what to say, I adopted a silent, calm demeanour (one of the tricks of the trade when you have a challenging moment as a therapist). I decided, as Selena was leaving, to keep the door open for some fresh air before my next client. But Selena automatically started to pull the door closed. I politely pulled it open again, gesturing my intention, but she pulled it back. To anyone watching in the waiting area I’m sure it looked like a tug of war between therapist and client. During this kerfuffle, I diplomatically and calmly informed Selena that I would like to leave the door open. She stopped and said, ‘I’ll think about it.’ She thought I meant I wanted to keep the door open to future therapy with her!</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 87. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_87" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I think back to this episode often as the perfect demonstration of both our unconscious wishes manifesting in our seemingly unrelated actions (on my side) and Selena’s interpretation of those actions (on her side). While my conscious mind told me I was simply leaving the door open to get some fresh air, in fact I was keen for Selena to return to therapy and work through what she wanted for her future. And Selena’s correct interpretation of my unconscious wish indicated her subconscious desire to return to therapy also. Significant meaning often lies beneath seemingly insignificant or unrelated actions. Psychoanalysts talk a lot about this, but we won’t go into that here.</p>
<p class="indent_para">A week later Selena arranged to come back for a session. It’s not uncommon for someone to drop out of therapy at difficult moments and then return after some thinking time. We explored what was going on for her. She had never worked out what she wanted for her life. No one had ever asked her what she wanted. She was a people pleaser. She avoided decision-making, and allowed other people to make decisions for her or for events outside of her control to ‘carry her along’. My question forced her to face up to both this hard truth, and the prospect that she might have to abandon the patterns she’d established in her life that felt familiar and safe. I was asking her to look at a life full of new possibilities. <span aria-label="page 88. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_88" role="doc-pagebreak"/>And rather than inspiring excitement, this terrified her. Thankfully, she was able to identify that fear was getting in the way. We worked on that together successfully.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I wonder at this moment if you are experiencing a similar reaction to Selena when I ask the question, <i>What now? What do you want for your future?</i> Pause for a second and notice how it makes you feel.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Perhaps you can identify some of the following emotions:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Vulnerability</li>
<li class="bull1">Reluctance</li>
<li class="bull1">Cynicism</li>
<li class="bull1">Doubt</li>
<li class="bull1">Fear</li>
<li class="bull1">Anxiety</li>
<li class="bull1">Instability</li>
<li class="bull1">Excitement</li>
<li class="bull1">Hope</li>
<li class="bull1">Curiosity</li>
<li class="bull1">Freedom</li>
<li class="bull1">Relief</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">There isn’t a right or wrong answer here. There are no cash prizes. There are no booby prizes. If you had a negative reaction to the question about your future, <span aria-label="page 89. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_89" role="doc-pagebreak"/>that’s completely fine. Your reaction could be telling you that fear, or old ways of thinking, are getting in the way of you envisaging a positive future for yourself. The good news is you can do something about that.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Likewise, a positive reaction could be a reminder that you are capable and ready to change.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The amazing benefit of therapy is that both positive and negative responses to questions about your future can be turned to your advantage. You could be feeling frightened, doubtful or vulnerable, but then turn these emotions into something powerful. As I’ve said before, therapy doesn’t always feel good, at least initially. But together we can deal with all the emotions that come up. We can even thank them for supporting us (which is part of their function). Emotions work with us in helping us navigate our way through life. They are like an internal watchguard of sorts. Some of the emotions you’ll experience during self-therapy may have felt overwhelming when you were a child, but as an adult you can now handle whatever comes up. Sometimes you just need to remind the child within you (and we all have one) that your adult self is on the case.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 90. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_90" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW HAPPY ARE YOU WITH YOUR LIFE RIGHT NOW?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Before you consider your future, it’s important to review what’s going well in your life and what isn’t going so well.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We’re going to do an exercise now that will encourage you to take a step back and assess how satisfied you are with the different areas of your life at this present time. The results of this exercise will act as a baseline that you can measure against in the future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I want you to stop and consider how content you are right now with each life area that I’ve listed out below, then rate each out of 10 according to this scale.</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract">8-10: Very satisfied</p>
<p class="extract">6-7: Reasonably satisfied</p>
<p class="extract">5: Could be a lot better</p>
<p class="extract">1-4: Dissatisfied</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent_para">If there are any areas that I’ve left out but which are important to you, feel free to add them in.</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Achievements to date</li>
<li class="bull1">Work/school/professional life</li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 91. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_91" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Finances</li>
<li class="bull1">Your home (by this I mean happiness with your home life, practically and emotionally)</li>
<li class="bull1">Where you live</li>
<li class="bull1">Social status</li>
<li class="bull1">How you look</li>
<li class="bull1">Friendships</li>
<li class="bull1">Romantic life</li>
<li class="bull1">Spirituality</li>
<li class="bull1">Family life</li>
<li class="bull1">Fun and adventure</li>
<li class="bull1">Self-confidence</li>
<li class="bull1">Values and principles</li>
<li class="bull1">Self-care (looking after yourself, physically, emotionally, psychologically)</li>
<li class="bull1">Physical health</li>
<li class="bull1">Mental health</li>
<li class="bull1">Hopes for the future</li>
<li class="bull1">Work/life (or study/life) balance</li>
<li class="bull1">Rest or relaxation time</li>
<li class="bull1">Making a difference to others or the world</li>
<li class="bull1">Looking after the planet</li>
<li class="bull1">General sense of satisfaction with all your life</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">How was that exercise for you? Some people find it enlightening. Let’s face it, we rarely stop to evaluate our lives. We’re all too busy working, looking after our families, <span aria-label="page 92. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_92" role="doc-pagebreak"/>scrolling Instagram or watching Netflix, to work out what we want.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whatever your rating in each of the areas of your life, please don’t be hard on yourself. If, for example, you arrived at a 4 or less in several categories, that’s OK. It’s better to be aware of your dissatisfaction than be in denial about it, as this helps you recognise which areas of your life might need a little work or more attention, and which have the biggest impact on your feelings of contentment. For instance, it may not be important to you that you have or make a lot of money, but so long as you feel like you’re making a difference in the world, you’re happy. Or you may identify that, so long as you’re feeling connected to your partner and getting a daily workout in, you’re generally content and can deal with anything life throws at you – whether that be a disappointment at work, or whether your finances or sleep or opportunities to have fun take a hit.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Equally, it’s useful to acknowledge your areas of satisfaction.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It won’t come as any great surprise to hear that almost every new client I meet is unhappy with their life. Not only that, but they can always list a few reasons (most of which are outside of themselves – we’ll come to that) why they are unhappy. These reasons tend to be the direct result of dissatisfaction with the specific areas of their lives that they consider to have the biggest impact upon their feelings of contentment. <span aria-label="page 93. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_93" role="doc-pagebreak"/>So, either they’ve not recognised that these are the areas of their life that matter most to them, or they’ve not been working to keep their satisfaction levels in these areas ‘topped up’ (which it is their responsibility to do, as it is yours).</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here are some of the most common reasons clients cite for being unhappy with their lives. You might identify with one or more of these:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">My husband/wife/partner is a pain</li>
<li class="bull1">Life is too stressful</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m so busy all the time</li>
<li class="bull1">I’ve had a terrible life</li>
<li class="bull1">I hate my job/boss/work colleagues</li>
<li class="bull1">If I were richer, I’d be happier</li>
<li class="bull1">The kids are wearing me down</li>
<li class="bull1">I wish I’d made better choices</li>
<li class="bull1">It’s all too much</li>
<li class="bull1">I can’t get over what happened to me</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">So, we’ve acknowledged that our happiness is dependent on understanding which areas of our lives matter most to us. And we’ve acknowledged that <i>some</i> of these areas, such as where we live, or our past experiences with family or friends, or life-changing health issues or injuries to ourselves or others, <span aria-label="page 94. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_94" role="doc-pagebreak"/>fall outside of the realm of how we feel and behave, and of our identity today.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But it’s equally important to be aware that these external factors are not <i>entirely</i> responsible for how we feel and behave.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Of course, some life events and current situations will have had a major effect on your feelings of contentment, and I don’t want to minimise the impact they’ve had on your life, mental health and wellbeing (particularly if you’ve experienced deep loss, trauma or adversity).</p>
<p class="indent_para">But if we believe circumstances, many of which are outside of our control, are entirely responsible for who we are now, we can be left feeling powerless or like victims.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There is another option: we have choices in how we manage the harsh cards life may have dealt us. Once you realise that, you’re empowered to act. Everything can change. ‘I can’t manage,’ becomes, ‘I have survived tougher moments.’ ‘This isn’t fair,’ becomes, ‘What can this teach me?’ ‘My life is pointless,’ becomes, ‘My life has possibilities.’ ‘I will never get through this,’ becomes, ‘I am getting there.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">I appreciate this might be a little uncomfortable to read, but, for most people at least, it’s the truth. We don’t realise that we have a major part to play in our psychological wellbeing and happiness. <span aria-label="page 95. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_95" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Life happens to all of us, but how we react is everything.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You may have worked out by now that I want to guide you sensibly on to the <i>‘What now?’</i> stage of our work. Your life satisfaction scores will help you consider what changes you would like to make for the future. For example, if you scored 3 on where you live, or your job, then of course it makes sense to look at ways of making changes in those areas. But I can’t emphasise enough that your internal world need not take a back seat. Look at the scores relating to your mental health, self-care, hopes for the future, self-confidence, and values and principles. Consider how you think and deal with emotions. If your internal world isn’t managed well, then you will continue to suffer. <i>If the inner world is neglected, the external world won’t fill the void of dissatisfaction</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT DO <i>YOU</i> WANT IN THE FUTURE? WHAT DO <i>YOU</i> WANT TO CHANGE?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Now that you’ve looked back at your life story and used it to help you understand who you are today, and you’ve taken stock of how you feel about your life now, it’s time to look forward. I’m going to ask again, what do <i>you</i> want your future to be? More of the same? Something better? A new start? Something extraordinary?</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 96. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_96" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This is huge. You are at a crossroads, and you have the chance to take a different route with your life. Stop and ask yourself: are you prepared to settle for a humdrum life, or do you want to create something exceptional? The only person who can answer this is you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I do want to share one thought as you ponder this. I spent ten years of my career in palliative care, watching people of all ages die, often unexpectedly and quickly. I am confident that most of those people, given a second chance, would have opted for more extraordinary moments in their lives. Whatever ‘extraordinary’ means for you, make your life count. And remember: ‘extraordinary’ doesn’t mean bigger, better or more grandiose. It can be found when you decide to be fully present in the ordinary moments.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ve broken the question down into two essential components:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Tangible, material life changes you want for the future</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">The internal changes you want to make (ways of thinking, managing emotions, behaviours). <a href="9780008378288_Chapter01.xhtml#ch1">Chapters 1</a> and <a href="9780008378288_Chapter02.xhtml#ch2">2</a> will help you identify what changes you personally would benefit from making in this area</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para"><span aria-label="page 97. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_97" role="doc-pagebreak"/>As with previous exercises, I am going to encourage you to take time out and consider the first of these questions carefully. You might have heard this stage described as ‘goals’, ‘plans’, ‘targets’ or ‘aspirations’ in other books. These are all great, but I would encourage you to think in terms of reclaiming life, hopes, contentment and peace. We’re diving inward here.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ve noticed as a therapist that most people, when discussing future wishes, automatically direct attention to the external stuff: money, job, house, car, weight loss, relationships, etc. I get it. I’m as guilty as everyone else. No judgement here. I’d love more hair. I’d love a Porsche one day. I’d love to be as fit as I was when I was 20. I sometimes wish I had the looks of Tom Hardy. But somewhere deep down, I know it’s not really me that wants that. My ego does, and that’s OK. Our egos seek glory and gratification but if we know that and manage it, all is well. Ultimately egoic desire doesn’t bring contentment. I know this personally. I see this with every client I work with. I’m sure it’s the same for you. I’ve learnt from bearing witness to, talking about, and working to understand human suffering for more than thirty years, <span aria-label="page 98. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_98" role="doc-pagebreak"/>that material gains don’t fully satisfy internal yearnings. Satisfaction and peace are primarily an inside job. I’m not saying here that you shouldn’t have that holiday, buy that dress, change your eating habits. Go ahead and make the changes that are going to improve your life. I am, however, recommending that you also listen to the internal voice that whispers, ‘Does this serve me well? Does this bring me peace?’ The answer always comes.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I now hand over to you to make your list of what you want for your future, both material life changes and internal changes within yourself, keeping in mind the areas of life that matter most to you.</p>
<p class="line1"/>
<p class="noindent_para">Did that exercise inspire you? I hope so.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’d like us to work through one final task, keeping in mind what you want for your future. But before we get to that, I’d like to share Callum’s story.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Callum is a recently qualified dentist I worked with recently who was struggling with anxiety and stress at work. He was a very engaged client and keen to change. When he completed his, ‘What do you want for your future?’ list, he agreed to read it to me at our session. It went something like, <i>I want to run my own practice by age 35. I want to drive a Range Rover. <span aria-label="page 99. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_99" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I want two children</i>. As I listened, I was struck by the mechanical, dull tone of his voice. There didn’t seem to be any passion for what he was saying. The way he spoke completely lacked energy. I commented on this, and he went quiet and looked at the ground for a long time before speaking. ‘I’ve just realised, this is not my list. It’s my father’s.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">Callum’s father was also a dentist and Callum had followed in his footsteps. His whole life, he’d felt immense pressure to please his father and live up to his expectations. Therapy was a very healthy choice for Callum. He was able to find his own voice and work out what <i>he</i> wanted for his life. He also had to work on making changes to unhelpful ways of thinking, some self-destructive behaviours, and to the direction of his career.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I invite you now to go back and read over your list of what you want for your future again, but this time, ask yourself these questions:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Am I happy with this?</li>
<li class="bull1">Are these <i>my</i> needs and wishes (watch out for people-pleasing)?</li>
<li class="bull1">Will this bring me a sense of hope, peace and satisfaction?</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 100. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_100" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Amend your list accordingly if you need to.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">THE IMPORTANCE OF COMMITMENT AND PATIENCE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Two of the most common reasons people drop out of therapy, and the work involved, are difficulty committing and impatience. We are a generation focused on speed and convenience. We want everything instantly, including massive psychological and behavioural changes. If it isn’t short, snappy and to the point, it’s difficult to engage people.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Therapy, however, <i>does</i> require commitment and patience, and I’ll explain why it’s worth investing in both.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>1. Commitment</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I want you to think of your daily commitment to self-therapy as something you do for yourself, rather than as an onerous piece of work that must be slogged through. This is your opportunity to turn up for your life, maybe for the first time. Every time you engage with this work you are respecting yourself. Of course, there are also practical considerations. You are working on changing emotional patterns, and patterns of thought and reaction that will have been part of your life for a very long time. <span aria-label="page 101. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_101" role="doc-pagebreak"/>As you’re essentially re-wiring your brain, this will require consistency, but the result will be an incredible ability to manage life completely differently.</p>
<p class="indent_para">A helpful way of thinking about this commitment is to have a key word you remind yourself of every time you’re going off track. My key word is <i>sabotage</i>. I know it sounds strong, but that’s a conscious decision. If I don’t commit to looking after myself, then I am sabotaging my wellbeing. Something about saying that word serves the useful purpose of giving me a kick up the backside. Whatever word you decide on, use it when you need to and make sure it’s a shocker! Use a word you will remember. It could be a cartoon character, something from a movie or anything that is relevant. What is crucial is that it acts as a clear signal to you that you are going off track.</p>
<p class="indent_para">A wise supervisor during my training reminded me that therapy without commitment is like using sunscreen made of cooking oil. It’s totally ineffective and can make things worse. And he was right. There is no value in discovering who you are and how you function unless you are willing to do something about it.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This is a commitment for life. A better life.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 102. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_102" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>2. Patience</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I’m always amused when some clients, after a few sessions, tell me they’re worried therapy isn’t working. When I ask them what they’d hoped would happen, they tend to say that they would have liked for it all to have been sorted out (their life, that is). No pressure whatsoever after three sessions. It always makes me smile when this happens. I have a standard response every time: <i>‘You will never have it all sorted out, even if you live to 100.’</i> And that’s the truth. There is no blissful end state where all your troubles will have vanished, and you live happily ever after. That doesn’t happen. Life, with all its up and downs, will continue to happen to you. It’s how you respond to the ups and downs that’s the key. Patience with the process will help enormously with how you manage life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s talk about that word, ‘process’. Therapy is often described as a process, and the very word implies patience. When I go to an art gallery, I am always struck by the detail that goes in to some of the great works. It reminds me of the hundreds of hours that will have been dedicated to the process. There will have been mistakes, sleepless nights, the ripping up and starting again, tears, disillusionment, and of course the age-old question, <i>Will this be good enough?</i> At the time, the painter won’t know that it’ll eventually become more than good enough. That it will become a masterpiece in the fullness of time. <span aria-label="page 103. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_103" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It is the painter’s patience with the process that helps their painting attain greatness. The painter’s talent becomes secondary to their patience.</p>
<p class="indent_para">What I encourage wholeheartedly is that you engage patiently. I think I’ve made my point about the importance of carving out time in your day to do the therapy itself. But more fortitude may be required when it comes to awaiting change to take place within you. You may find yourself falling into the following thinking traps:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Defeatist:</b></span> ‘What’s the point of this?’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Frustrated:</b></span> ‘I don’t have time for this.’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Impatient:</b></span> ‘Why am I not feeling better?’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Avoidant:</b></span> ‘This is not for me.’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Defensive:</b></span> ‘This is all bull*hit.’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Denial:</b></span> ‘I’m completely fine.’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Repression:</b></span> ‘I’ll do this another time.’</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Persecutory:</b></span> ‘I’m beyond help.’</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">As with the key word you’re going to be employing when your commitment starts to falter, I encourage you to do the same when you sense your own impatience. If helpful, my phrase is ‘<i>missed opportunity’</i>. When I’m impatient I run the risk of missing something incredible.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 104. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_104" role="doc-pagebreak"/>We are all works in progress. Sometimes we need to be reminded not to place unrealistic expectations on ourselves and make things more challenging than they ought to be. Commitment and patience in therapy are both essential.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Speaking of the essential ingredients for effective therapy, the <a href="9780008378288_Chapter05.xhtml">next chapter</a> brings us on to the other therapy non-negotiables: tools, techniques and tips, employed alongside self-care and self-respect.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>