<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 3: Putting the pieces together</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 57. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_57" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch3"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch3">3</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch3">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch3"><b>Putting the pieces together</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">I</span>’ve used this metaphor before but I’m going to roll it out again, since I think it explains the point I need to make here perfectly: therapy can be a little like doing a jigsaw. There are many pieces – that is, the main highs and lows of your life. But the full picture – all there is to know about who you are, and why you are that way – isn’t clear until they are all put together. A jigsaw with a missing piece will always be incomplete. We need all the pieces.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s the same when working through the parts of our story. We can’t pick and choose which experiences to focus on because they feel good. <span aria-label="page 58. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_58" role="doc-pagebreak"/>If we are to understand who we are and why we are that way, we need to understand our whole story, even if that means confronting some ugly feelings, or times when we might have behaved badly or been made to feel small.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You might be wondering why understanding your story is so important. It’s all in the past, after all. I’ve lost count of the number of times I’ve heard, ‘Do I really have to go through all this?’ in the therapy room. And the short answer is yes! Because within your story there are gems of information that will help create life-changing awareness in your life now. Your story has more power than you might think.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ve also said this before but it’s worth saying again: no one else can recount your story or make sense of it the way you can. I can provide the guidance, but you are the expert of your life. I often remind my clients of this. I can never really know how a client feels or has experienced a life event. Yes, I can hypothesise and empathise, but I can never truly go through what they went through.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This reminds me of a therapy client, Julie, who recounted a painful memory of not getting new shoes on the first day of school, aged 10. All the other children appeared to have new shoes and she didn’t. At the time, her family was struggling financially and her dad was dependent on alcohol. <span aria-label="page 59. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_59" role="doc-pagebreak"/>As she told this story, she wept inconsolably. As I watched her cry, I assumed her upset was linked to embarrassment or other shame-related feelings around her school friends. But I was wrong. Her distress was linked to memories of severe physical pain because her shoes were so tight. She didn’t tell her mum. Julie believed she couldn’t bring additional burdens to an already heavily burdened mum. She feared that her needs would cause the family greater stress and that it could all fall apart. She therefore learnt to suffer in silence, not only as a child but most of her adult life. Her tears arose from a lifetime of unexpressed needs and fear of burdening anyone. Telling her story and putting the pieces together in therapy changed that. Without therapy, she likely would have suffered for the remainder of her life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">And that is why your story is vitally important, and why you, and only you, can make sense of it.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW DO I CONNECT MY PAST TO MY PRESENT?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Now that you have told your story, in this chapter I’ll talk you through how to make sense of it. We’re going to connect the past events of your life with who you are today. This will help you understand why you are the way you are.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 60. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_60" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Our first exercise is all about figuring out what you are struggling with in your life <i>now</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Then we’re going to look back through your timeline and figure out which event or period in your life might have been the cause of this struggle. The all-important <i>why</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Finally, we can begin to look at possible solutions to the issues you’re struggling with. These solutions will incorporate techniques that you’ll later be employing in your daily practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Remember, we’re just doing the foundation work here. We’ll look at how you become your own therapist further on but for now, we’re simply focusing on answering these questions:</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>What do you struggle with now?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>How might your story explain your issues?</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="chap_h2"><b>WHAT DO YOU STRUGGLE WITH NOW?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I realise this is a tricky question, and if you’re anything like me the answer will change daily. And that’s totally normal. Our thoughts, feelings and reactions to life are always in a constant state of flux, <span aria-label="page 61. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_61" role="doc-pagebreak"/>just like the weather. There will, however, be negative themes that recur again and again. It’s just that our lives are so busy, we might not be conscious of the issues that routinely plague us until we choose to be actively aware of our moods, thoughts and behaviours. This is why we’re going to be working on bringing your awareness to your fluctuating emotional states. Once you’re equipped with an awareness of the main psychological challenges that are holding you back, you can choose to make changes in your life that will help resolve these issues. Awareness helps put you back in the driving seat of your life.</p>
<p class="line1"/>
<p class="noindent_para">It’s amazing how we can go from feeling like the Dalai Lama to the Hulk in a second.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I was recently taking a walk in the countryside, meditating and feeling at peace with the world. Ten minutes later I fell unceremoniously into a ditch and found myself covered in cow dung. It’s fair to say that my thoughts and emotions changed quickly as I scrambled to my feet, dropping a few f-bombs along the way!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Thankfully, I was able to restore my sense of balance and laugh at the situation – something I’ve learnt through therapy. But many people struggle to manage their responses to the ups and downs of everyday life and get stuck in very unhelpful emotional states. <span aria-label="page 62. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_62" role="doc-pagebreak"/>If this sounds familiar, perhaps certain situations trigger negative emotional cycles in you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You might be finding it hard to get to grips with what your main issues are. I have a bit of insight that might help. Having worked in healthcare for thirty years, I’ve witnessed a great deal of physical and psychological suffering first-hand, and in that time, I’ve noticed that most people’s struggles fall into one of four main categories.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The research in most therapy disciplines will support my experience, but some models simply use different language.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The four key areas of struggle tend to be around:</p>
<ol class="order-gray2" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g1">Lack of self-worth</li>
<li class="num-g1">Not feeling safe and secure</li>
<li class="num-g1">A sense of hopelessness</li>
<li class="num-g1">Questioning your lovability</li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">We’ll go into more detail about each of these in a moment. Note how they are all linked to the third layer of the cake we spoke about earlier: your foundation core beliefs.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There are also natural ‘personal struggle sub-themes’ that accompany each of these categories. <span aria-label="page 63. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_63" role="doc-pagebreak"/>For example, someone with low self-esteem might also feel socially anxious. So, that might mean that you’re experiencing a cluster of different psychological struggles, all of which you initially believe you need to tackle separately, when in fact they are all related and can be approached effectively together.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Or it might mean that your main psychological obstacle doesn’t seem to be explicitly covered by any of these categories, but it is in fact closely linked to one of them.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When it comes to the human condition, nothing is ever black and white. Whatever you struggle with, try to work out how it links to one of the four themes.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Recognition of what you may be struggling with is crucial. It’s impossible to move forward without some degree of insight. And I discourage any of the following brush-offs that I hear daily:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">‘It’s not that bad.’</li>
<li class="bull1">‘It could be worse.’</li>
<li class="bull1">‘Other people are worse off than me.’</li>
<li class="bull1">‘No point dwelling on that.’</li>
<li class="bull1">‘That’s just the way I am.’</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">If you’re smiling reading this list, then I’m probably talking to you!</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 64. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_64" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Let’s look at the four areas of struggle in more detail, and remember to keep in mind how your everyday struggles might link in with some or all of these.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>THE FOUR AREAS OF STRUGGLE</b></p>
<p class="chap_h3">1 LACK OF SELF-WORTH</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Low self-worth can take many different forms and can lead to very different behaviours and feelings in different people. But fundamentally, low self-worth is a sense of either feeling ‘less fundamentally valuable than other people’, ‘inadequate’ or ‘not good enough’, despite there being no evidence to back up any of these negative feelings. It can manifest in many ways, ranging from a lack of confidence, avoiding people or situations, self-limiting beliefs, or battling with an inner dialogue that has strong tones of doubt, questioning, self-deprecation or even self-loathing. <i>It’s living with a sense that you are lacking. It’s living apologetically. It’s living uncomfortably</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Other people will appear better off than you and nothing you do will ever feel enough. Low self-worth will impact your home life, personal life, work life, <span aria-label="page 65. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_65" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and every aspect of your world. Everything might feel like it’s an uphill battle. You may seek out ways to soothe this via alcohol, drugs, food or any substances that alter your state of mind. Alternatively, you may find yourself engaging in patterns of people-pleasing, overcompensating, perfectionism and opting out of life events that you don’t feel worthy of.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Life can become all about trying to hide, or make up for, you ‘not being good enough’. If this applies to you, particularly if you’re only just realising it, this section may be a little hard to read, and you might even have some uneasy feelings stirring now. The discomfort is important and a healthy sign. Don’t run away from it as it will bring you to the realisation that you are good enough, more than good enough.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">2 NOT FEELING SAFE AND SECURE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Feeling safe and secure is noted as a priority in all therapy models. A feeling of safety and security is also important for our development. When we feel safe and secure, we tend to flourish in all aspects of life. On the other hand, when we feel unsafe or threatened, we struggle. In other words, we are anxious. Unfortunately, not everyone grows up in environments that feel safe and secure. Many homes are dominated by conflict. Many neighbourhoods are rife with crime. <span aria-label="page 66. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_66" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Many people feel threatened if they are in any way different, e.g. in terms of their skin colour, race, sexuality, religion or gender. I meet many people who grew up in countries with war, division and oppression. I also encounter a lot of people who have experienced violence, threats, abuse, bullying or humiliation, sometimes even from family members.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In summary, we live in a very imperfect, sometimes unsafe, messy, unpredictable world. Consequently, many people understandably enter adulthood feeling unsafe, vulnerable and frightened. Their brains have been hardwired to feel constantly threatened and anxious. The issue is exacerbated by the belief that they should be strong, resilient and in control, but they’re failing. Therapy techniques can help to rewire the brain so it’s less predisposed to feel under constant threat.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">3 A SENSE OF HOPELESSNESS</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Have you ever noticed that young babies smile at anyone? They don’t judge. They don’t see bad in people. They stare at everything with a sense of awe and excitement at all the possibilities. The world is a place to be explored. They are easily satisfied; all they need is food, drink, shelter and love. They cry when their needs are not met but they tend to settle when at ease (which is most of the time). <span aria-label="page 67. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_67" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I can imagine some parents rolling their eyes now, perhaps following a sleepless night!</p>
<p class="indent_para">But this is not a forever state. Babies soon grow up, absorbing every interaction, experience and situation. Depending on context and circumstance, some learn that the world is a safe place while others learn it’s frightening and unsafe. When it comes to the latter, the people they encounter may be angry, dissatisfied, disillusioned or absent. The environments they encounter may be tough and sometimes impoverished. Money, food and employment may have been, or continue to be, scarce. The language surrounding them could have been negative and pessimistic. Hope is for other people, they are told, either explicitly or implicitly.</p>
<p class="indent_para">These experiences are their norm, so mood issues, depression and lack of motivation become the norm. The path to a niggling sense of hopelessness is set.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><i>People don’t choose to be hopeless</i>. They become weary and worn out. Hopelessness is symptomatic of experiences. But thankfully new experiences can be created, and healing can occur. Hope is possible. I have witnessed this every day of my career over the last thirty years. Therapy is driven by hope, and you will experience it in our work together. If you’re feeling a sense of hopelessness right now, <span aria-label="page 68. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_68" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I promise it <i>can</i> get better. It just takes a little time and effort.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">4 QUESTIONING YOUR LOVABILITY</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Have you ever noticed how many hit songs focus on love, heartache and loss? ‘All you need is love.’ ‘Can’t help falling in love.’ ‘I will always love you.’ ‘Can’t buy me love.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">Love captures us. It sells products. We are told it makes the world a better place. Whatever your definition of love, there’s no doubt most of us want it.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Love means feeling connected, seen, heard and understood by another human being. We crave a sense of belonging and to know we are not alone. In the absence of love we may wonder, ‘Am I lovable?’</p>
<p class="indent_para">But we don’t necessarily need to be single to question how lovable we are. Some people find themselves asking the same question when they’re in a loving relationship, sometimes because of prior relationships or experiences. I heard a great expression from a Jesuit priest many years ago: ‘If you really knew me, would you still love me?’ What it means is that many of us doubt our lovability because we believe that our imperfections make us inherently less lovable. I believe our vulnerabilities make us more lovable.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 69. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_69" role="doc-pagebreak"/>If you’ve <i>never</i> been told that you’re loved, then it’s logical to doubt your lovability. But that doesn’t make it true. Not everyone knows how to express love. I came from a family where there was love but the word itself wasn’t used very often. This may be true for you too.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There is another possibility I would like you to consider. There are people in your life who may not have loved you in the way they should have. This doesn’t mean you were not deserving of love, but it’s possible that some of these people genuinely didn’t know how to give it. For example, some people have a parent who doesn’t know how to express love to them. They simply don’t know how to do it. But we must also consider that love was never shown to them. Unexpressed love or an inability to express love can be transgenerational. An expression I come back to often that articulates this well is, ‘Everyone is at fault, but no one is to blame.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whatever your experience has been of love, knowing you are lovable is pivotal to a full, happy life. To ignore that would be a travesty. Together, we will face your belief that you are not lovable (if indeed that is a belief you hold) head on, because whoever you are, whatever your story, whatever mistakes you’ve made, you are lovable. We all are. We are born that way.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 70. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_70" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>OVER TO YOU FOR A LITTLE WORK</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I can hear you sigh, but it will be worth it.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s break the work down into manageable chunks, exploring how you think, feel and behave, in relation to the four areas we’ve just covered. You may not need to cover all four areas; it could be that one area feels particularly pertinent to you. For example, if feeling safe and secure isn’t a big issue for you, then it’s fine not to dwell on that. You are in the driving seat here and it’s your decision what you focus on.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I should preface this by saying that therapy isn’t like a visit to a spa. You won’t always feel pampered and indulged. There will be moments when you may not like what I say. You may feel like throwing the book at the wall or calling me some lovely swear words. Don’t worry, I’ve heard them all before. I’m sure it must have been a therapist who came up with the well-worn phrase, ‘No pain, no gain.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">But on the upside, therapy is transformative, and I guarantee you won’t look back. I’ve said this before but it’s worth reiterating now: many people can be disappointed when therapy doesn’t feel ‘good’ all the time. But it shouldn’t! Growth is hard work. <span aria-label="page 71. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_71" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Uncomfortable moments can often be the most powerful. Sometimes when you connect with something that is truthful, it may feel difficult. You may feel a sense of resistance, anger, sadness, frustration, or want to avoid the feelings that are coming up. I strongly encourage you to stay with the feelings as much as possible. They are there for a reason and they serve a purpose – try to remember that when the self-therapy experience feels difficult. It will empower you.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>EXERCISE 1</b></p>
<p class="chap_h3_1">HOW TO RECOGNISE YOUR STRUGGLES</p>
<p class="noindent_para">When you have decided which of the four areas of struggle you want to give your attention to, block out time to focus on <i>one at a time</i> somewhere quiet where you won’t be interrupted. If possible, aim to spend thirty minutes on each. I suggest you work through the questions below for each of the areas of struggle, taking notes as you go. For example, if you are working through <b>hopelessness</b>, keep that theme in mind as you ask yourself the questions.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You may find that some of the questions touch on similar areas and you’re giving the same sort of answers. <span aria-label="page 72. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_72" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This is normal.</p>
<p class="indent_para">A reminder again of the four areas and everyday examples that may link to them:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray-color"><b>Lack of self-worth:</b></span> feels like low confidence, self-doubt, fear of risk, self-criticism, not feeling deserving, not feeling good enough</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray-color"><b>Not feeling safe and secure:</b></span> feels like anxiety, can lead to panic attacks, phobias, avoidance of new situations, dislike of new routines, hypervigilance</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray-color"><b>A sense of hopelessness:</b></span> can mean depression, a lack of motivation, giving up on life, avoiding situations and people, lack of self-care, destructive behaviours</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray-color"><b>Questioning your lovability:</b></span> can result in relationship difficulties, not valuing yourself, accepting poor behaviour from others, negative appraisal of yourself, not prioritising your own needs, speaking negatively about yourself</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">A reminder that <i>this stage is simply acknowledging and recognising</i> what you may struggle with. Whatever comes up, just try to stay curious about how you react.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 73. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_73" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>QUESTIONS TO REFLECT ON FOR EACH OF THE FOUR AREAS:</b></p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Do I have ways of thinking about myself, others and life that feel particularly negative, critical, fearful or catastrophic? Do I doubt myself and others, or am I cynical about others’ intentions?</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">Make a note of whatever came up for you, as well as any other unwelcome or unhelpful ways of thinking not listed here and the situations during which those feelings surfaced. When does this happen for you? How often? Are there particular triggers or situations? It could be that reflecting on these questions makes you feel an unexpected emotion or leads to thoughts about something else. Remember you are simply noting what happens and not trying to work it all out at this stage. If specific examples come to mind, then of course, write them down. For instance, you may recognise you have a pattern of deflecting or refusing praise, a recent example being when you made a birthday meal for your partner yesterday but brushed off the compliments and said it was ‘nothing’, despite it taking you several hours to put together. There will be many examples that come to mind. <span aria-label="page 74. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_74" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Essentially you are bringing to life how your patterns play out in your everyday life.</p>
<p class="chap_h3">NEXT, WE’RE GOING TO LOOK AT FEELINGS.</p>
<ol class="order-graya" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist" start="2">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Do I regularly find myself feeling fearful, vulnerable, unsafe or lonely in my everyday life? Do I routinely feel sad, misunderstood, empty or isolated? Is a sense of abandonment the norm for me?</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">Make a note of whatever came up for you, as well as any other unwelcome or unhelpful ways of thinking not listed here and the situations during which those feelings surfaced. Reflect on any particularly pertinent examples from your everyday life that exemplify this issue. Ask yourself: are there some feelings that crop up more regularly than others? What do you do with these feelings when they arise? For example, do you try to block or stop them?</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 75. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_75" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<p class="chap_h3">NEXT, WE’RE GOING TO LOOK AT YOUR BEHAVIOURS. THIS IS WHERE IT GETS REALLY INTERESTING.</p>
<ol class="order-graya" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist" start="3">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Do I sometimes find myself behaving destructively? For instance, by drinking too much, taking recreational drugs, bursts of defensiveness, shouting or aggression, devoting a lot of my time to blaming others, engaging in bullying behaviour or lying?</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">Make a note of whatever came up for you, as well as any other unwelcome or unhelpful behaviours not listed here that you’ve noticed in yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Now that you have reflected and identified the thoughts, feelings and behaviours surrounding the four areas of struggle, I want you to hold on to one thought and keep it with you throughout your reading of this book and beyond.</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract"><i>Everyone, including you, was born good enough. Any belief to the contrary is a falsehood that you were taught by people or circumstances</i>.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent_para">Our job together is to help you unlearn anything dysfunctional or unhealthy. And to do that I need to help you understand <i>how life experiences that have happened to you influence who you are today</i>.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 76. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_76" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<p class="chap_h3">HOW MIGHT YOUR STORY EXPLAIN YOUR ISSUES?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">It’s common for there to be more than one root cause behind our main areas of struggle. It’s worth remembering that as children and in our formative years, our brains are like sponges, absorbing everything we hear and experience. Children can’t differentiate using emotional intelligence the way an adult can. If someone calls a child ‘stupid’, ‘fat’, or ‘ugly’ regularly, then they may begin to normalise this as a truth. If, as a child, you are compared with a sibling and told they are brighter or better looking than you, then that sense of being ‘of less value than other people’ begins to kick in.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In my experience, much of the damage normally occurs at home. My intention here is not to blame parents or families, simply to offer the truth as I see it. Many families operate from dysfunctional foundations. They don’t intend to cause harm, but they do. You know the script: ‘Why can’t you be more like your brother?’, ‘Stop whining and leave me alone’ or ‘You’re lazy, selfish and ungrateful.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">Within many homes there are patterns of comparing, undermining, ignoring, criticising, judging or placing high expectations on a child, and this can cause problems. When this happens regularly, the negative message (whatever it is) is reinforced, <span aria-label="page 77. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_77" role="doc-pagebreak"/>which, in turn, influences the brain’s neuropathways and our learnt emotional responses. I’ll give you an example.</p>
<p class="indent_para">A child is told by his parents he is going to be a great football player when he grows up. His father wants him to play for England. They want a successful career for him, but the child has average skills at the game. Each time he comes home from a football game he is criticised by his father for not playing well enough, and told he should work harder. This happens after most games and the child feels humiliated and that he is a ‘let down’. He then begins to develop a sense that he is of <i>less value</i> than other people and <i>not good enough</i>. A new neuropathway is consequently formed in his brain which conditions him to believe that unless he’s successful, he’s not good enough. His worth is compromised. Low self-worth is set in place.</p>
<p class="indent_para">These negative influences can also be found beyond the family home, within different cultures, religions, schools, gender stereotyping and of course all forms of media (social media especially). We are surrounded by people telling us who we should be, how we should be and what we should be! As a gay man, I am more than familiar with the detrimental impact these influences can have, and the importance of rewriting that script.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 78. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_78" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I’m going to be honest about how my own self esteem took a battering because of negative influences.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As a gay teenager growing up in a working-class area of Belfast, where there were clear ideas about how men should behave, I was always going to struggle. My version of masculinity didn’t match up with that of the people around me and I didn’t always fit in. I couldn’t play football, for example, so I was at times ostracised. A question began to form in my mind, ‘Am I not enough?’ Culture and environment played a role in my feelings of low self-worth.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I grew up Catholic and listened to hundreds of sermons as a child telling me that <i>people like me</i> would go to hell. When I got older and became more conscious of my sexuality, I remembered those sermons and they made me wonder whether I was less worthy than other people. Later, I’d wonder, ‘Am I a bad person?’ Religion played a role in my feelings of low self-worth.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I went to a primary school that encouraged its pupils to excel in sports and praised sporting excellence above other skills and talents, but I far preferred music over sports. Again, more reinforced messages about not quite fitting in or being good enough.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m sure you get the picture. Various influences contributed to feelings of self-doubt and, over time, <span aria-label="page 79. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_79" role="doc-pagebreak"/>these became habitual. But my salvation was in finding a therapist and making sense of them. The circumstances I’d found myself in reinforced the lie that something was inherently wrong with me. But the truth was, I was completely fine. This insight changed everything for me.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I hope you can experience a similar revelation in your therapy with me.</p>
<p class="chap_h3">HOW DO YOU LINK YOUR STORY TO WHAT YOU STRUGGLE WITH NOW?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">So far, you’ve identified the biggest issues you struggle with, and you’ve told your story in full.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Now we’re going to piece them both together (like the jigsaw I mentioned earlier). You want to be asking yourself the question:</p>
<p class="indent_para">What parts of my story can help me understand why I might sometimes have <i>low self-esteem, not feel safe or secure, experience feelings of hopelessness or not consider myself to be lovable?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">As before, if emotions or reactions come up as you’re reflecting on or answering the questions, simply take note and allow them to be. Ideally you want to be curious about any emotional responses that crop up without being distracted by them.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 80. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_80" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>EXERCISE 2</b></p>
<p class="chap_h3_1">HOW TO CONNECT YOUR STORY TO YOUR EVERYDAY STRUGGLES</p>
<p class="noindent_para">First, I invite you to go back and read over your story and see if anything immediately grabs your attention or helps you make a connection with what you struggle with today in relation to the four areas we have explored. For example, Jason, a client of mine, noticed a recurring theme in the subtle messages he’d received from his family throughout his life: avoid getting excited by life and you’ll prevent disappointment. It was almost a family motto. As an adult he identified that this was one of the contributing factors to his intermittent episodes of depression and feelings of hopelessness.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You are looking for those ‘Aha!’ or ‘lightbulb’ moments. Moments when you think, ‘My struggle finally makes sense.’ Take note of any thoughts that emerge.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here are some reflective questions that might help you out.</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><span aria-label="page 81. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_81" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>1. How might my family and home life have impacted upon each of my main areas of struggle today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Was I valued, respected and listened to?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>2. How might my community or environment have impacted upon each of my main areas of struggle today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Did I fit in? Was I included?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>3. How might my church or religion have impacted upon each of my main areas of struggle today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Did this part of my life make me feel good?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>4. How might my time at school or college have impacted upon each of my main areas of struggle today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Was I bullied or humiliated?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>5. How might any key incidents in my life have impacted upon how I see myself today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Was I a carer for a family member? Was I overweight or did I have acne as a teenager? Was I sexually assaulted?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><span aria-label="page 82. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_82" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>6. How might my relationships (family, friends, work, romantic) have impacted upon each of my main areas of struggle today?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">e.g. Can I recall any relationships that were destructive?</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>7. Detail anything else in your story that is significant for you in relation to the issues you struggle with and how you see yourself.</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts">Here is a brief recap on where we are at this stage. Therapists love a recap, bear with me.</p>
<p class="indent_para">So far, you have:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Told your life story in full without filter or self-judgement</li>
<li class="bull1">Identified your main areas of psychological struggle</li>
<li class="bull1">Connected your story with your struggles</li>
<li class="bull1">Gained a better understanding of why you might struggle</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">In the <a href="9780008378288_Chapter04.xhtml">next chapter</a> we’re going to continue the foundation work by looking at what exactly you want to change in the future based on what you now know about yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">People make the mistake of thinking therapy is all about talking. <span aria-label="page 83. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_83" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It’s not! It is a way of life based on talking, feeling, responding, and knowing what you want and what you’re doing. Think of it like training for a marathon: you need to do more than join the gym and buy new trainers. I’m going to be giving you the tools so that this way of living becomes second nature to you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This work is about moving forward. I can’t assume to know what you want for your future. But what I can say is: salvage what you can from your experiences and allow them to be part of a brighter future. We can’t take a shortcut through the difficult parts, but the efforts you put in now will be paid back tenfold.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>