<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 5: Actions speak louder than words</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 105. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_105" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch5"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch5">5</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch5">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch5"><b>Actions speak louder than words</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">B</span>y now, you’ll have more insight into who you are and how you operate. You’ll also have arrived at a vision of how you’d like to function psychologically, and feel, in the future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We now move on to the doing: the <i>actions</i> of therapy. These are the therapeutic tools and techniques you can use during your daily self-therapy to tackle your personal psychological ‘problem areas’ that we identified in <a href="9780008378288_Chapter03.xhtml#ch3">Chapter 3</a>. They will change the way you think now to the way you want to think in the future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We’ll be revisiting the techniques you’ll be learning in this chapter in <a href="9780008378288_Chapter06.xhtml#ch6">Chapters 6</a>, <a href="9780008378288_Chapter07.xhtml#ch7">7</a>, and <a href="9780008378288_Chapter08.xhtml#ch8">8</a>, <span aria-label="page 106. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_106" role="doc-pagebreak"/>when I take you through your ten-minute self-therapy practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Therapy is often referred to as a ‘talking therapy’, but I find this to be a restrictive definition. Good therapy involves so much more than just talking. Talking is like stretching at the gym; transformation can only happen with actions.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whatever you are struggling with, whether it be relationships, addiction, anxiety, depression, loss or any of the issues that make us human, action is a crucial part of the process. Talking gets the ball rolling, action brings about change.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In my experience there are four key <b>actions</b> and four <b>self-commitments</b> that need to be part of everyone’s therapy, regardless of the issue. The actions and self-commitments go hand in hand.</p>
<p class="chap_h3">THE FOUR ACTIONS OF THERAPY ARE:</p>
<ol class="order-gray1a" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g1">Restructuring how you think</li>
<li class="num-g1">Rewriting your rules and beliefs</li>
<li class="num-g1">Engaging in healthier behaviours</li>
<li class="num-g1">Engaging with life</li>
</ol>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>1. Restructuring how you think</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">As we know, thoughts can sometimes be problematic. Occasionally, they are hard to switch off. They can be negative, <span aria-label="page 107. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_107" role="doc-pagebreak"/>critical, burdensome, harsh, sabotaging, catastrophic, judgemental, unhelpful and fearful. On the other hand, they can also be helpful, rational, kind and a force for good. But the harsh reality is, negative thoughts tend to draw us in more. They have a magnetic quality. We are more likely to listen to negative thought patterns.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The problem is that we assume we have no control over our thoughts. That they’re a fact of life that we need to put up with. And to an extent this is true.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But we also know, from our work earlier, that we can be programmed to think in certain ways in particular situations. And while that can be a problem, particularly if the thought patterns we’ve been programmed with are negative, this also means that we can program ourselves to have positive thoughts in certain situations, too.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We also tend to accept our thoughts as factual and truthful. This creates challenges because often they’re not. Sometimes they are random and make no sense.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Finally, there is the issue of how we relate to our thoughts. For example, if you have a thought you deem ‘bad’, that doesn’t mean you are a ‘bad’ person. It signifies you are human. There have been interesting studies with OCD research showing how random, nonsensical and out-of-character thoughts can sometimes be. <span aria-label="page 108. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_108" role="doc-pagebreak"/>We all have the capacity to have violent, sexual, angry or blasphemous thoughts that run counter to our values or belief systems. None of these thoughts define who you are but if you relate to them as if they do, then you will feel distress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Just to be clear, I am not saying that all thoughts are to be ignored. Sometimes thoughts follow a rational process and are an important part of psychological processing, decision-making and staying safe. The key is to be able to identify the difference between a helpful, adaptive thought and an unhelpful, maladaptive thought. You might be wondering how to tell the difference. It’s quite simple.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Unhelpful thinking patterns, although familiar, tend to contribute to distress and a sense of discomfort. They tend to be spontaneous, fast, repetitive and have a burdensome quality. Think of the last time you had some thoughts that were difficult to listen to: ‘You’re a failure,’ ‘This is going to go wrong,’ ‘Don’t speak, people will laugh at you,’ for example. Such thoughts will alter your mood and increase your anxiety. They will feel uncomfortable.</p>
<p class="indent_para">On the other hand, helpful thinking presents differently. For example, you may have a decision to make or a task to complete. As you begin to think through the pros and cons of your decision, or the actions required to complete the task, your thoughts will feel appropriate and necessary. <span aria-label="page 109. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_109" role="doc-pagebreak"/>They are in context, whereas the former are fear-driven or misguided. It is worth mentioning here that anxious thinking isn’t wrong. Some degree of anxiety can be healthy. But when the threat is exaggerated and not in context with the reality of the situation, it becomes problematic.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Back to how we can reprogram our negative thought patterns. There is a simple process for doing this and it involves four steps:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Recognising an unhelpful thought pattern</li>
<li class="bull1">Examining the evidence to support the thought you’re having. Is there irrefutable proof that what you’re thinking is true? For example, you might consider applying for a job, then immediately think, ‘I’ll never get it.’ Where is the evidence to support that as true?</li>
<li class="bull1">Replacing the thought with a more helpful alternative</li>
<li class="bull1">Letting go of the unhelpful thought</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">The incredible power of this technique is that each time you do it to disrupt unhelpful ways of thinking, you’re encouraging your brain to respond differently in the future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Up until now, you’ve never questioned the validity of your thoughts, <span aria-label="page 110. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_110" role="doc-pagebreak"/>so your brain has continued to deliver these unhelpful thoughts on the basis that they’re protecting you, by stopping you from doing things your brain believes are harmful. But when you start challenging them, your brain recognises that you’re not buying into familiar thought patterns, and instead you’ve presented more rational, adaptive alternatives. You’re starting to reprogram your mind to think more flexibly. From thereon in, your brain will start responding with healthier thoughts. You’re literally getting one step closer to re-wiring your brain permanently each time you use this technique. This also means that each time you employ it will be slightly easier than the last.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Isn’t that powerful? You don’t have to be a victim of your thoughts. You are not your thoughts. You are free of the tyranny of your mind.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>2. Rewriting your rules and beliefs</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">As you know from telling your story and linking it to your life, the unwritten rules and beliefs you live your life by are highly influential. They are your compass. You learnt as a child that if you behaved in a particular way it got you noticed, accepted, loved, respected and so on. You also learnt how to stay safe and minimise the risk of harm. These learnings became your rules and beliefs. The problem is these rules have probably never been reviewed in your adult life. <span aria-label="page 111. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_111" role="doc-pagebreak"/>They may not serve you well anymore.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I think of rules and beliefs as like wearing your favourite outfit. We all have clothes that can boost our confidence, stability and sense of ease. When I’m giving a talk, I always wear clothes that I like. If I wear a shirt that’s a little tight (a regular problem since turning 40) or new shoes I haven’t worn in, then I don’t deliver as well. I’m showing up restricted, and it shows.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s similar with rules and beliefs. If you are living according to rules and beliefs that don’t work for you, it’s restrictive and uncomfortable. It’s like living in a straitjacket.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Rules and beliefs are usually prefaced with <i>must</i> and <i>should</i>. This is normally followed up with another belief about consequences. For example, <i>I must never lie. If I lie, something bad could happen to me</i> (common belief when religion is involved). I’ve mentioned this before but it’s worth saying again: there is nothing wrong with rules and beliefs in themselves. When used well, they can support you and help with a sense of wellbeing and balance. It’s when you start to believe there is no flexibility or choice with your rules and beliefs that the problems arise.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Patrick’s story highlights this well. I met him a few months after he had finished university. <span aria-label="page 112. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_112" role="doc-pagebreak"/>He graduated with a 2:1 and became depressed several weeks after his results were issued. Patrick was a straight-A student from childhood. He’d been president of the student union at university and was predicted a first-class degree.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When he didn’t achieve his first, Patrick believed that he had not only failed himself but also his family. At one stage, he considered taking his own life. As we set out on Patrick’s path to recovery, I discovered he held extremely rigid personal rules and beliefs. His ‘shoulds’ and ‘musts’ focused on never failing, never disappointing people, never saying no, always being the best. He was a perfectionist in every aspect of his life. Not achieving the degree he’d expected was his first experience of disappointment. His inflexible rules and beliefs didn’t support him through this.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We worked on creating more flexibility and openness with his rules and beliefs, and slowly his depression began to lift.</p>
<p class="indent_para">‘I must be the best,’ was replaced with, ‘I can only try my best.’ ‘I must not disappoint,’ was replaced with, ‘Sometimes I might disappoint, and that’s OK.’ ‘I should always please people,’ was replaced with, ‘It’s not always possible to please everyone.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">Patrick created flexibility with his rules and beliefs, and in turn his mood improved, he found freedom and openness, <span aria-label="page 113. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_113" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and became a much happier, more peaceful person.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The same process is also possible for you. I encourage you to make a list of all the ‘shoulds’ and ‘musts’ you’ve created for your life and ask yourself whether they can be made more flexible.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As you’ll have realised by now, though, it’s not just about making a list. We also need to work on putting your more flexible approach into practice. The next time you realise you’re functioning from a place that’s inflexible, stop. Acknowledge that you have the choice to review your rules and beliefs. You can opt for more flexibility.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>3. Engaging in healthier behaviours</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">When we are having a difficult time, most of us seek out comfort in some way. You may notice that the extra drink in the evening, drugs, spending, distractions, sex or whatever works to soothe you, suddenly becomes habitual. Before going any further here, I want to assure you that the fun police haven’t arrived! We all need some fun, lightness and distractions at times. But when behaviours come with negative consequences or get in the way of your life, it’s time to reassess.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s normal to want to numb your emotions, or distract yourself, or seek out escapism or endorphin rushes when life is challenging. But it’s always a temporary solution. <span aria-label="page 114. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_114" role="doc-pagebreak"/>At some point you must return and face the music – that is, your day-to-day life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here, I’d like to encourage you to do some soul-searching and evaluate the behaviours in your life that could potentially be creating issues for you, the unhealthy ways that you’re seeking comfort.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In my clinical practice, the <a id="ss1"/>problematic behaviours that I see tend to be centred around:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Alcohol</li>
<li class="bull1">Drugs</li>
<li class="bull1">Food</li>
<li class="bull1">Sex</li>
<li class="bull1">Overspending</li>
<li class="bull1">Gambling</li>
<li class="bull1">Unhealthy relationships</li>
<li class="bull1">Conflict and anger</li>
<li class="bull1">Self-sabotaging</li>
<li class="bull1">Sleep</li>
<li class="bull1">Self-neglect</li>
<li class="bull1">Avoidance (not doing what you need to do)</li>
<li class="bull1">Delaying gratification (putting off things you enjoy)</li>
<li class="bull1">Defensiveness (feeling the need to protect and defend yourself)</li>
<li class="bull1">Anger (potentially overreacting to situations)</li>
<li class="bull1">Criticising (overly critical of others and yourself)</li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 115. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_115" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Judging (making harsh judgements about others and yourself)</li>
<li class="bull1">Projecting (mistakenly believing others to feel what it is you feel but do not acknowledge)</li>
<li class="bull1">Withdrawing (socially pulling back, leading to isolation)</li>
<li class="bull1">Regressing (responding with more juvenile, childlike responses)</li>
<li class="bull1">Psychological inflexibility (not seeing other people’s point of view)</li>
<li class="bull1">Being defeatist (giving up easily)</li>
<li class="bull1">Being in denial (not acknowledging what’s happening)</li>
<li class="bull1">Self-focusing (not paying attention to the needs of others)</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">If these, or any other behaviours you can think of, are getting in the way of your life, I encourage you to think of ways of reducing, improving or stopping them. Sometimes this will require support. It may also involve substituting some of your behaviours with healthier alternatives. Again, I don’t want to be prescriptive about this. I suspect you will intuitively know what you need to do. Most people do. A reminder again that a list of support organisations is provided at the end of the book.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I know this work isn’t easy. I’ve said a few times now that behaviours, <span aria-label="page 116. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_116" role="doc-pagebreak"/>choices and actions are important. A person can have all the insight in the world but unless they are willing to act, the work is pointless.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>4. Engaging with life</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">In my career, I’ve been lucky enough to work alongside some exceptional people. People who care. People with incredible skills and empathy. As therapists we all have supervisors who are also therapists. Every therapist talks to another therapist to get support. It’s like a daisy chain of support.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In one of my NHS jobs, I was supervised by a very intelligent and skilled psychiatrist. He was diagnostically sharp. I learnt a lot from him about psychiatric disorders, the importance of assessment and the role of medication with some people. He was also brutally honest, which I really liked.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I remember a discussion with him about a patient, Philomena, who was struggling with severe anxiety and depression. I had tried every technique and I was getting nowhere. I was feeling defeated and a little lost (my perfectionist rules and beliefs were winning out over adaptive thinking). My supervisor looked at me, and asked, ‘Have you tried “life” with this patient?’ Initially I was baffled. He went on to say, ‘The antidote to pain is life.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">I asked him to elaborate, and he replied, ‘Is your patient engaging with any aspect of life: <span aria-label="page 117. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_117" role="doc-pagebreak"/>work, socialising, exercise, volunteering, a walk, a hobby, gardening?’ And there – a sudden lightbulb moment. Philomena was naturally disengaging from most of her life, but she loved gardening. I, short-sightedly, hadn’t considered it could be part of treatment.</p>
<p class="indent_para">My supervisor suggested I ease up on all the techniques and encourage Philomena to connect with her gardening. And that’s exactly what I did.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As luck would have it, my job at the time was close to a gardening centre, and they were seeking volunteers! Fast-forward four weeks, following a lot of persuasion and patience: Philomena started her training there. Everything changed. She came alive in our sessions. Within weeks her symptoms improved. She became motivated. Her eyes sparkled. There was a lilt in her voice I’d never heard before. She had found the antidote to pain: gardening.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This experience changed how I work as a therapist. Of course, we need to follow a process and use therapeutic techniques, but we must include ‘life’ in the treatment plan, whether it be through a gym, a book club, Zumba, bird-watching, fishing or something else completely. All of life offers healing if we can find something to connect to.</p>
<p class="indent_para">And now I put this question to you: how engaged are you with life?</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 118. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_118" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Stay with this question. Take time with it. Don’t rush.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If you’re going through a tough time right now, that’s OK. Is there one part of life you could connect with a little more? It might feel difficult and you may need to start slowly. But that’s fine. If you like walking, go for a five-minute walk today. It’s a start. If you like nature, just go look at a tree today. It’s a start. If you can do more, great. Do what you can.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you connect with what interests or matters to you, your body releases the feelgood hormones serotonin, oxytocin and dopamine. You start to feel more connected to other people. Your motivation improves. Negative patterns crop up less and less frequently. You begin to heal.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Today I challenge you to take one step towards re-engaging with your life, particularly if you have been avoiding it. <i>The antidote to pain is life</i> has become something of a mantra for me. I think about it often. Maybe it can perform the same function for you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The solutions you are seeking are likely to be closer than you think.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">THE FOUR COMMITMENTS TO SELF</p>
<p class="noindent_para">We now move on to look at what I call <i>the four commitments to self</i>. These are more of an internal job, a change of perspective if you like. You may be surprised at how deceptively simple, <span aria-label="page 119. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_119" role="doc-pagebreak"/>yet empowering, they are. They involve a shake-up of your approach to yourself. The four commitments are:</p>
<ol class="order-gray1" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g1">Talking to yourself as though you’re someone who matters (because you <i>do</i> matter)</li>
<li class="num-g1">Looking after yourself</li>
<li class="num-g1">Going easy on yourself</li>
<li class="num-g1">Showing up in your life authentically</li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">On average, most people, if they were rated for how well they performed in each of these areas, would get a very low score. I meet people from every walk of life in my line of work. The one common factor I see every day: <i>people don’t treat themselves well</i>. I believe this is unquestionably the crux of the human struggle.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The most consistent part of your life is you. You will have you with you until your last breath. How you speak to yourself, how you treat yourself, how you look after yourself are symbols for your life. Whatever life throws at you, if you are in ‘good company’ with yourself, then the journey will be so much more manageable and enjoyable.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I went travelling to the US in my twenties – a cliché, I know! Partway through my trip, I met a fellow backpacker and we agreed to travel together for a month. <span aria-label="page 120. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_120" role="doc-pagebreak"/>But after one week, I was exhausted. He was negative. He complained about everything. He was critical. He was unappreciative. He was also very rude to most people he interacted with.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I tried hard to be compassionate, but I realised I couldn’t travel for a full month with him. After the first week I told him I was going to travel alone and that’s what I did. Even though I was anxious about solo travelling, I realised I could rely on the part of me that was kind, curious, open to adventure and generally keen to have a good time. I could be alone with myself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In life, we need to learn how to become solo travellers because sometimes we might unexpectedly be alone, or circumstances might change. We need to learn the skill of being able to talk to ourselves in a positive tone. We need to learn how to look after ourselves. We need to learn how to be compassionate to ourselves. We need to be able to show up in the world, comfortable in our own skin. When we live this way, we adjust better to life’s uncertainties and unpredictability. It’s like living life in the presence of a reliable best friend. And that best friend is you.</p>
<ol class="order-gray1t" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g1"><span aria-label="page 121. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_121" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Talking to yourself as though you’re someone who matters (because you <i>do</i> matter)</li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent_para">We all have a running internal dialogue. Take a minute to stop and notice the chatter. It tends to sound something like this: ‘Why did he say that?’, ‘Does my boss like me?’, ‘Is my partner bored with me?’, ‘I’m too fat,’ ‘I wish I was a better mum/dad.’ And on and on it goes.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Our internal tone towards ourselves can often be destructive, harmful, judgemental, even cruel.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Clients often describe negative events in their life to me – events like conflict, hardship, loss or heartache. As they’re describing these events, I always ask one question: <i>How are you talking to yourself in this moment?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">These are the type of responses I hear almost every time:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">I’m such an idiot</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m stupid</li>
<li class="bull1">This is my fault</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m pathetic</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m a waste of space</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m useless</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m a fool</li>
<li class="bull1">I’m a [insert endless list of expletives]</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para"><span aria-label="page 122. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_122" role="doc-pagebreak"/>People talk to themselves like they don’t matter. And that’s exactly how that kind of internal chatter leaves them feeling. Our emotional response correlates with the tone and language we use towards ourselves.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If this is striking a chord with you, I have one suggestion: <i>Work on paying attention to the tone of your internal chatter. As soon as you feel it turning negative, shut that voice down. Calmly and firmly tell it to stop. You deserve better</i>. Once you’ve accepted that you matter, then you owe it to yourself to talk to yourself like you do. Change your tone. Change your language. Talk to yourself the way you would talk to someone you respect. The transformation will be instantaneous.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>2. Looking after yourself</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">It might sound a little odd that I’m including this as part of therapy, but it’s crucial. Self-care isn’t high on the agenda for most people. I often deliver talks on mental health to large organisations. These I’ll start by asking how many people have devoted time to self-care that day. On average I’m lucky if a dozen people raise their hand, and that can be in a room of 500 people!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Before we continue, let’s first define self-care. Self-care is the act of looking after yourself physically, psychologically, emotionally or even spiritually. It doesn’t necessarily mean taking a bath or having a massage (although it can mean both or either of these things, <span aria-label="page 123. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_123" role="doc-pagebreak"/>if that’s what you really need). Eating a healthy diet, exercising, resting, mindfulness or meditation, seeing friends and family, and practising gratitude are all forms of self-care.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I encourage you to think of self-care broadly and evaluate truthfully how you look after yourself every day. Here are some questions to ponder:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Does your diet support a healthy lifestyle?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you manage to include some physical exercise (within your capabilities) into your day?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you create breaks within your day?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you engage in anything that helps quieten your mind?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you talk about issues that are bothering you?</li>
<li class="bull1">How often are you connecting socially with others?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you feel there is balance between your work and your non-working life?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you prioritise other people’s needs before your own?</li>
<li class="bull1">Do you express appreciation for the positives in your day?</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">Self-care can sometimes be misunderstood or portrayed as selfish, a luxury, or unrealistic considering the demands of modern life. <span aria-label="page 124. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_124" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I would challenge this. Self-care is <i>essential</i> for healthy daily functioning. It’s responsible. It not only helps you get the best from <i>your</i> life, but others also experience the best of <i>you</i>. It is a powerful statement that you value and respect yourself. You are taking responsibility and ownership for your life. Earlier we discussed the impact of how you talk to yourself on how you feel about yourself. Self-care (or the lack of it) has a similar effect. Self-care is a therapeutic act. You are showing up in your life and deciding that you deserve looking after. Without self-care, the risk of exhaustion, burnout, breakdown – call it what you like – increases significantly. There is nothing fluffy or self-indulgent about self-care. It needs to be taken seriously. I see the darker side of people ignoring the warnings from their body that they need to take care of themselves. You have the choice to proactively change this today.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>3. Going easy on yourself</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I noticed a few years back that when I asked clients about self-compassion, they often threw me a suspicious glance. It could translate to, ‘What snowflake wizardry is this man talking about?’ That’s when I started phrasing the question differently: ‘Do you give yourself a hard time?’ To <i>that</i> question I’d almost always get a resounding ‘<i>Yes</i>.’</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 125. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_125" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I started following that question up with another: ‘Do you think life would be easier if you did less of that?’ Again, invariably a resounding ‘<i>Yes</i>.’ This is the point at which I now suggest we talk about self-compassion.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Self-compassion is broader than how you talk to yourself. It’s a much deeper level of self-care that is both mindset- <i>and</i> action-based. It means employing self-acceptance and warmth, it means dialling down the judgement and learning to comfort yourself in darker times.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It means saying, ‘It’s OK,’ ‘We can do this’ and ‘I’m with you’ to yourself when it seems impossible. It means asking yourself the question, ‘What do you need?’ Self-compassion means you instinctively learn when to leap into action and when to stop, when to advocate for yourself and when to protect yourself, e.g. ‘Let’s take a break,’ ‘I’m taking you away for a holiday,’ ‘I want you to see less of these people’ or ‘Let’s go out for a walk and switch off for a while.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">If I were forced to choose just one tool as a therapist, it would be self-compassion. Let me explain why. As humans we make mistakes. We screw up sometimes, we fail, we fall, we experience exhaustion and we are imperfect. And we persecute ourselves for all of that.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 126. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_126" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Self-compassion is powerful because it means accepting and sitting in our flawed humanity. Because this is very difficult for most people, practising self-compassion tends to cut right to the source of our issues. You learn to get to know the enemies within yourself and approach them with greater understanding, lightness and openness.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Self-compassion means embracing life as it is, and yourself as you are, now. It’s not conditional on successes, achievements or accolades. If you are someone who gives yourself a hard time, try a self-compassionate approach. It is a loyal, faithful companion that you can access at any time, and it won’t let you down.</p>
<p class="chap_h4"><b>4. Showing up in your life authentically</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">In a society that’s obsessed with creating the illusion of perfect lives, perfect bodies, perfect relationships, perfect teeth and so on, I propose a different route. Simply show up unapologetically as you are.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I wholeheartedly believe that when we try to create an illusion that is at odds with who we are, we weaken our position. People sense inauthenticity immediately. We can feel it when we are around people who aren’t sincere or genuine. If an authentic approach doesn’t get you what you want, perhaps you are on the wrong path. If you dilute, minimise, <span aria-label="page 127. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_127" role="doc-pagebreak"/>or fabricate who you are, you compromise your integrity and the foundations supporting you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I remember once being advised by a friend not to talk too much about my own struggles in book interviews because ‘People don’t want advice from a therapist who has struggled.’ I disagreed and chose not to adapt my approach. I am good at my job partly because I personally have known, and I understand, human struggle. Why would I hide that? The best professionals in health and psychology are often those people who have walked the walk.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m not advocating that you shouldn’t strive for self-improvement. Personal growth can fulfil you and help to augment those aspects of your personality and identity that make you special and unique. All I ask is that you avoid the trap of believing you need to be different from what you are. You don’t.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Commit to your authentic self. It won’t let you down.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 128 is intentionally left as blank. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_128" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>