<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 6: Get ready for your day</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 131. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_131" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch6"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch6">6</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch6">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch6"><b>Get <i>ready</i> for your day</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para">Have you ever had one of those days where you’ve rushed out of the house already late for an appointment looking like you’ve been dragged through a hedge backwards, with your jumper on inside out and just blindly hoping you’ve got your phone, wallet and keys with you? Apart from looking like you’ve just been on a motorbike without a helmet, you also notice that your mind is racing. Everything feels frantic, chaotic and imbalanced. You’re not set up for the day and consequently the remainder of the day landslides into what can best be described as a pile of crap. We all have them.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 132. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_132" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Next time you’re on a morning train or bus, or in traffic, observe how frazzled everyone looks. But it doesn’t have to be this way.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Now you’ve completed the foundation work, we’re going to incorporate your learnings into your everyday life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">One of most common misconceptions that exists around therapy is that it’s a once-a-week chat, and that’s it. Job done. But therapy is a way of life, and it needs to be so because life throws new challenges at you all the time. Once you’ve mastered the skill of navigating your way along life’s twists and turns, you’ll feel truly empowered.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Your ten minutes of daily self-therapy is a mix of proactive and reactive techniques that will help restore a sense of balance.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This chapter will focus on the first <i>four minutes of your daily ten-minute practice</i>. These four minutes get you <b>ready</b> for the day ahead the right way.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I must admit, I wasn’t always a morning person. I wasted a lot of time faffing about, not achieving much. Therapy taught me to change that. How we start the day strongly influences how we experience the rest of it. Some of the research around mindfulness supports this.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I imagine many of you will be thinking about the volume of responsibilities you have each morning: <span aria-label="page 133. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_133" role="doc-pagebreak"/>getting the kids up, doing the school run, walking the dog, making packed lunches, getting to work and so on. Now I’m adding another chore to your list! I accept that. But these four minutes will, I promise, change every aspect of your day. If you can spend a few minutes brushing your teeth and having a shower, then I strongly encourage you to find a few minutes to take care of your mind. It might even involve letting go of something else that isn’t a priority.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW DOES THIS WORK?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Everyone’s morning routine is different so I won’t be prescriptive about exactly when in the morning this should be done. I simply ask that you fit these four consecutive minutes into the first few hours of your day. The earlier, the better. I just have one condition: that you find somewhere quiet and private for these four minutes to allow yourself space. If that involves locking yourself in the bathroom, then so be it. If noise is an issue, use headphones or ear plugs. Practically, I encourage you to find ways to make it work and be aware of the negative script that may pop up saying that it’s ‘impossible’, ‘I can’t do this’ or ‘I don’t have time.’ Notice this voice and gently shut it down.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 134. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_134" role="doc-pagebreak"/>During these four minutes of self-therapy, we’ll cover off four focus areas. I’m going to give you all the background, the context and the ‘why’ of your daily self-therapy practice as well as the ‘how’ over the following few pages, so the content covering your practice will look like a lot to take in at the first read-through. But don’t worry. Only some of this relates to the ‘how’: what, practically, you’ll actually be doing every day as part of your self-therapy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Also, don’t fret if you run over time to start with. This process will get easier as you become more familiar with it. Think of it like essential daily checks.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I want to reiterate that while the daily self-therapy I’m teaching you in this book is not a substitute for a full course of in-person therapy, putting aside these four minutes to kickstart your day is a hell of a lot better than taking no minutes. Most people dedicate zero time to therapeutic self-care. You are a step ahead of the game.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The four areas of focus are:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 1 | Emotional regulation check-in: <i>How am I doing today?</i></p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 2 | A self-care strategy taken from compassion-focused therapies: <i>What do I need today?</i></p>
<p class="extract2"><span aria-label="page 135. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_135" role="doc-pagebreak"/>MINUTE 3 | A tool used in integrative therapy: <i>Gratitude and intention</i></p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 4 | A technique used in mindfulness and EMDR therapy (explained on <a href="9780008378288_Chapter06.xhtml#page_156">p156</a>): <i>Grounding</i></p>
</blockquote>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 1: HOW AM I DOING TODAY?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">This involves tuning in to where you’re at emotionally, physically and psychologically by curiously exploring each of the following questions:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><i>How am I emotionally today?</i> What emotions are present and dominant? Here, we want to acknowledge your emotions and let them guide you in a way that will benefit you</li>
<li class="bull1"><i>How does my body feel?</i> Scan for any tension, discomfort and pain</li>
<li class="bull1"><i>What’s my mind doing?</i> Observe the volume, speed and quality of your thoughts</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">I’ll take you through how to perform each of these check-ins in a moment, but first, let’s remind ourselves of why it’s important to know how we’re doing every day.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 136. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_136" role="doc-pagebreak"/>If we don’t know how we are, then we won’t know what we need. If we don’t know what we need, then we won’t look after ourselves properly. And that’s a form of self-neglect, which leads to unnecessary suffering.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If you’re a fan of the sitcom <i>Friends</i>, you will be familiar with Joey’s infamous chat-up line, ‘How <i>you</i> doin’?’ It never ceases to make me laugh. It also pops into my head sometimes when I’m asking a client how they are. Naturally, I avoid asking, the question in Joey’s signature flirty style (that would be disconcerting for clients!), but I try to avoid asking, ‘How are you feeling?’, which sounds clichéd to my ears. Additionally, at the start of therapy, it’s sometimes hard to access and name your feelings, or you might not be ready to experience the vulnerability that shows up when you attempt to dive straight in and interrogate your feelings with a capital F. A more down-to-earth, open question tends to produce more useful replies that we can work with. This is why I suggest you start with ‘How am I doing?’ not ‘How am I feeling?’</p>
<p class="indent_para">The reality is most people never take a moment to stop and check in with how they are. Most of the population wake up, roll out of bed and autopilot into the day. Let me put this another way. If we think of ourselves as a functioning body with the brain our main engine, <span aria-label="page 137. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_137" role="doc-pagebreak"/>why wouldn’t we carry out daily maintenance checks? I’m sure most of us wouldn’t fly with an airline that didn’t check the engines before take-off. Why then don’t we do the same before we take off into our day? It’s a no-brainer!</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW AM I EMOTIONALLY TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Assuming you are somewhere quiet, away from distractions, I suggest you start by sitting comfortably, feet apart and placed firmly on the ground. Close your eyes and place your hand on your heart or tummy area. The act of placing your hands on the parts of your body associated with emotion can help you become more aware of your emotional responses.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Next, gently ask yourself, ‘<i>How am I doing today, emotionally? What’s going on?’</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">If emotions such as a sadness or anger are present, they will emerge, and finding ways to express that will come. Asking the question with curiosity, openness, and compassion allows the emotion to reveal itself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Remember, at this stage you are not trying to remove the emotion or do anything with it. You simply need to acknowledge it’s there as this will inform how you plan your care for the day.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 138. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_138" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In the second minute of self-therapy, we’ll consider what actions you’d like to incorporate into your day that will help soothe any negative emotions you find. For example, if you discover sadness, then self-care, an adjustment to your routine and speaking to a close friend could all be scheduled in to your day. This way, you’re facing your emotions and saying to that part of yourself, <i>I hear you. I see you. I am here for you</i>. For now, though, you are simply self-soothing.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW DOES MY BODY FEEL?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">There’s an expression, <i>The body keeps the score</i>. What this means is that when we endure heartache, loss, trauma or adversity, the pain from these experiences is often held in the body. Our body remembers them. Sometimes a life event can activate these memories physiologically, and they manifest as bodily pain and tension. Just like emotions, that pain can serve as a barometer for how we’re doing, even if consciously we’ve not acknowledged the depth of our distress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Think about when you hear people say, ‘I have a lump in my throat,’ or ‘My chest is pounding’ or ‘I feel like my head’s going to explode,’ but there seems to be no logical explanation as to why. Nothing’s upset them that they’re aware of, they haven’t just run for the bus, they aren’t frightened. <span aria-label="page 139. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_139" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In these instances, it’s possible they’ve triggered a negative memory, and they’re experiencing that memory physically rather than psychologically. It’s a reminder again that we can’t view the mind and body in isolation. The research is clear. They are inextricably linked.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The pain of that memory needs acknowledgement and eventual release.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m trained in a model of trauma therapy called EMDR (eye movement desensitisation reprocessing). If I’m working with someone with severe trauma using this model, on occasion it can be difficult for that person to access their traumatic memory or memories. Sometimes when this happens, they can access those memories through physical bodily sensations instead.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I once treated a young woman who had been tortured in her home country because of sexual orientation (same-sex sexual activity is illegal in 69 countries). She had all the symptoms of severe PTSD but struggled to recall the details of her experiences. During treatment she started to cry and protect her arms. She was clearly in pain. After a while she began to settle, and we finished the session.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When I asked her about protecting her arms while crying, she looked a little puzzled. She had no recollection of doing that. Then she rolled up her jumper to reveal multiple cigarette burns. <span aria-label="page 140. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_140" role="doc-pagebreak"/>While her mind couldn’t remember these being inflicted upon her, her body remembered and her distress was expressing itself in the pain she was feeling on her arms, a reliving of the pain she’d felt during torture. Her trauma was manifesting itself physically.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Granted, this is an extreme example. But I use it to demonstrate how, if you are holding on to negative emotions or not dealing with issues in your life, they can get held in the body. This will create discomfort and lead to physical health problems. Research shows that many (not all) physical health issues have some psychological component. This doesn’t mean the physiological symptoms aren’t real; they are very real. But it’s always worth bearing in mind the role psychological difficulties like stress, loss, emotional pain and trauma have to play in bringing about physical health issues in those already at risk, or exacerbating pre-existing symptoms.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Which takes us to your daily body scan. Ask the same question of your body that you asked of your mind, staying seated with your eyes closed. <i>How is my body today?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">Allow your mind to scan your body, head to toe, simply noting what you find there. Is there tension? Does it hurt anywhere? Maybe you discover an unexpected ache or tingling. It’s all fine, whatever you discover, <span aria-label="page 141. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_141" role="doc-pagebreak"/>because it’s better to be aware than unaware.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Again, I encourage you to maintain your sense of openness, curiosity and compassion. If you do discover an issue with your body, this will inform how you treat your body for the rest of the day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For now, though, you are simply acknowledging your body: <i>I hear you. I feel you. I’m here for you</i>. The therapeutic actions throughout your day will facilitate the release of your pain and help you to understand what it is your body is trying to tell you. But we’ll come to those.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT’S MY MIND DOING?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Finally, you want to briefly check in on your mind’s activity. <i>What’s my mind doing today?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">Is there lots of activity? Are your thoughts jumping around? Is there a negative script running through your head today? Remember, don’t engage with your thoughts. You are simply scanning the landscape of your mind to see what’s going on, nothing more. As always, stay open, stay curious, stay compassionate. You’re saying to your mind, <i>I hear you. I see you. I’m here for you</i>. You will be amazed at what you discover.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When I have a busy mind, I keep it simple with my check-in and remind myself that it’s just a stormy day. <span aria-label="page 142. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_142" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I know that I can take actions throughout my day that help quieten the storm, and that’s enormously reassuring.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There you are. The first of your ten minutes of daily therapy is complete. Together with a helicopter view of how you are emotionally, physically and psychologically today, you’ll likely have discovered masses of new information about yourself – information that you might not have been aware of until now. Isn’t it incredible that just one minute can achieve that? Compare this with the mechanical responses we offer to people asking how we are – usually a version of:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><i>Fine</i></li>
<li class="bull1"><i>All good</i></li>
<li class="bull1"><i>Not bad</i></li>
<li class="bull1">(Or, if you’re Irish, <i>Could be worse</i>)</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">They offer no insight into ourselves at all!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Now we move on to the second minute: responding to what you’ve discovered during your check-in.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 143. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_143" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 2: WHAT DO I NEED TODAY?</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">When it comes to self-care and self-compassion, as I’ve said before, people can get twitchy. I see this a lot with my clients. They look a little suspicious and uncertain when either is mentioned, as if I’ve suggested something weird and wacky. But self-care and self-compassion are just modern-day rebrandings of ‘taking care of oneself’, something hundreds of more enlightened cultures and communities have been doing successfully for millennia.</p>
<p class="indent_para">More specifically, I view self-care as the <i>practical</i> act of caring for yourself, and self-compassion as the <i>attitude</i> that comes with it. While one can happen without the other (I can care for myself practically but still be treating myself appallingly in my mind), that should be avoided. Care and compassion need to work hand in hand. I call this <i>carepassion</i>: the act of caring for oneself compassionately.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m fascinated by our reluctance to be kind and compassionate to ourselves. Being kind to yourself, certainly in Western cultures, is commonly considered to be selfish, egotistical, unfair to others or a sign of weakness. Let’s set the record straight: this is absolutely not the case. Treating yourself with kindness and compassion, <span aria-label="page 144. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_144" role="doc-pagebreak"/>both in body and mind, improves the wellbeing of the people around you, as well as your own. Scientific research into compassion-focused therapies, mindfulness and neuroscience all indicates that self-care and self-compassion are essential if we want to function well. They are not luxuries.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Based on the discoveries from the first minute of your self-therapy, I now invite you, in the second minute, to ask yourself what you might need today and how can you respond with a <i>carepassionate</i> approach to your emotions, body and mind.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT DO I NEED EMOTIONALLY TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">The simplest way of thinking about how best to respond to your own emotional needs is to consider how you’d respond to a distressed child. Most people, when they see a child crying, upset, frightened or vulnerable, will seek to comfort and soothe that child. It’s an innate primal response. And that’s exactly how we should try to respond to our own emotions (particularly difficult ones) when they arise.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whatever emotions you’ve discovered during your check-in, try now to simply ask those emotions, <i>What do you need?</i> Allow a moment for the emotion to speak. <span aria-label="page 145. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_145" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It may be that an image, a word, a memory, a sound or even a song comes to mind. Clients often describe gaining valuable insights when they follow this process. Here are some examples of needs that arise:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Sadness</b></span>: I need rest. I need release. I need to be heard. I need to stop.</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Anger</b></span>: I need this to change. I need to be understood. I need to express this.</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Fear</b></span>: I need to feel safe. I need to know I’m not alone. I need to know everything is OK.</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Loneliness</b></span>: I need company. I need to be understood. I need new people. I need someone to listen to me.</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">When you have a sense of what needs your emotions are revealing, it’s time to decide what acts of <i>carepassion</i> might help you care for your emotional self that day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT PRACTICAL STEPS COULD I TAKE TODAY TO HELP MYSELF EMOTIONALLY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Consider what would help you find a sense of ease and comfort. Here are some ideas for practical steps you could take to soothe yourself:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 146. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_146" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Rest</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>A day away</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Lunch with a friend</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>A walk in the park</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Watching a film</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Cooking a favourite meal</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW WILL I TREAT MY EMOTIONS TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Will you go easy on yourself? Will you talk to yourself calmly, and with kindness and acceptance? Will you drop the judgement, criticism and harshness towards yourself?</p>
<p class="indent_para">Notice how the emotions begin to settle. And they do so because they have been given permission to be seen, to be heard and to be as they are. They have been accepted and cared for with compassion by you. It may be that this has never truly happened before. You and your emotional self are now aligned. This is a powerful way to live.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT DOES MY BODY NEED TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">When you check in with your body, whatever you uncover there, it’s important to respond to it. You are asking your body, <i>What do you need?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 147. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_147" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Here are some examples from clients who described strong physical symptoms, and what those symptoms revealed about their needs:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Pain</b></span>: I need release. I need freedom. I need to get away. I need to let go.</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Tension</b></span>: I need to relax more. I need space. I need to express this.</li>
<li class="bull1"><span class="gray1"><b>Tingling</b></span>: I need reassurance. I need some clarity. I need a plan. I need to find ease.</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">When you have a sense of what your body may need, it’s time to decide what acts of <i>carepassion</i> might help you care for your body that day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT PRACTICAL STEPS COULD I TAKE TODAY TO HELP MY BODY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Whatever your mobility status, some form of action could help unlock the negative energy that’s held in your body. I believe the act of moving creates flow that helps unlock areas of ‘stuckness’. Here are some ideas for practical steps you could take to soothe yourself:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Exercise</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Stretching</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 148. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_148" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Yoga or Pilates</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>A walk or a run</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW WILL I TREAT MY BODY TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Will you go easy on yourself? Will you treat your body gently, and with kindness, and acceptance? Will you drop the judgement, criticism, and harshness towards your physical self? Will you fuel your body with the nutrients needed to support your health?</p>
<p class="indent_para">Again, when you implement these actions, notice how the body settles. And it does so because it has been acknowledged as it is. It has been accepted and cared for compassionately by you. It may be that this has never truly happened before. You and your body are now aligned. This is also a powerful way to live.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT DOES MY MIND NEED TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">The human brain, like every organ in the body, can sometimes be overworked. It needs time to rest, reset and recover. If you don’t create space within the day for this to happen then your brain will soon become exhausted. Taking care of your mind is as essential as taking care of your body.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It is worth remembering that your brain is like a sponge. It is absorbing all the content of your day. <span aria-label="page 149. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_149" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It takes in all your experiences. It responds when you overthink. It activates your ‘threat’ mechanism when you’re in stressful situations. In short, it will keep working unless you instruct it to pause. Techniques such as meditation and breath work are powerful because they can act as a means of instructing the brain to pause or slow down. They create equilibrium. But you don’t have to use meditation or breath work – anything that helps create a sense of calm and space in your day is good.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT PRACTICAL STEPS COULD I TAKE TODAY TO HELP MY MIND?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Each day perhaps consider the following, alongside meditation and breath work, if those work for you:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Rest for your mind (reading for pleasure, a favourite TV programme or film)</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Minimising stress and pressure</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Feeding your mind nurturing information (motivational podcasts, a documentary, a TED Talk, a non-fiction book on a subject of interest)</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Spend time in green spaces (remember that the research highlights the benefits of nature for mental wellbeing)</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 150. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_150" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Eat healthy foods that promote a healthy brain (there is an abundance of information online from nutritional experts about the positive impact of nutritionally dense food on mental wellness)</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Talk kindly to yourself (critical self-talk creates distress)</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">Remember: your mind is the epicentre of everything. Maintenance isn’t a luxury, it’s an absolute must.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW WILL I TREAT MY MIND TODAY?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Will you go easy on yourself? Will you treat your mind gently, and with kindness and acceptance? Will you drop the judgement, criticism and harshness? Will you give your mind time to reset and recover?</p>
<p class="indent_para">Notice how your thoughts begin to slow, and how their tone becomes gentler and more compassionate. Acknowledge how your thoughts have more clarity and are more helpful in nature. They make sense. Your mind has been accepted and cared for compassionately by you. It may be that this has never truly happened before. You and your mind are now aligned. This is a powerful way to live.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 151. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_151" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 3: GRATITUDE AND INTENTION</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Our brains are hardwired to look for problems. Neuroscientists have estimated that around 60 per cent of our thoughts are negative or fearful in nature. That’s a lot of negative thinking! But the challenge is that our brain thinks it’s helping us out. It’s programmed to prepare for the worst in order to assist you in avoiding harm or danger. Sometimes this will prove useful. But often it has no purpose, apart from creating psychological distress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The good news is there is a simple antidote to this: gratitude and intention.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Both can help flip the brain into a healthier adaptive way of thinking that will completely change your day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">GRATITUDE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Let me start by saying that I haven’t always been a fan of gratitude as a concept, and I’ll explain why. I practise meditation daily. Many years ago, I had a teacher who talked lots about the importance of gratitude. But he always made me feel guilty. He would often state that whatever problems anyone in the class was having, <span aria-label="page 152. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_152" role="doc-pagebreak"/>they were nothing compared with what others in the world were experiencing. He would then list natural disasters, countries in conflict or a tragic news headline at the time. This would be followed by an instruction to recite a mantra: <i>I have much to be thankful for</i>. And, in turn, I’d think to myself, <i>Shame on you, Owen!</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">One evening after class, I noticed a woman from the class sitting on a wall close to the studio. I could tell she was crying. I tentatively approached to check she was OK. She wasn’t. Interestingly, she was also experiencing a sense of shame that she wasn’t feeling grateful for all the good things in her life. She was deeply sad, and gratitude wasn’t high on her agenda.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As we talked, she told me about her 21-year-old son who had been killed the previous year in a motorbike accident. She was in the depths of grief, and was trying to work her way through the enormous sense of sadness and loss. She felt guilty that she had forgotten about the plight of others.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But she hadn’t forgotten. Her grief had simply temporarily clouded her ability to empathise with others’ pain.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I think it’s important, when we employ gratitude, we do so without shame. I completely understand that it can be extremely difficult to evoke feelings of gratitude if you’re feeling depressed, <span aria-label="page 153. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_153" role="doc-pagebreak"/>anxious, lonely, bereft or hopeless. And that’s 100 per cent OK. The human mind won’t automatically produce grateful thoughts at these times because it’s too busy producing fearful thoughts! But this is where it gets interesting. Psychological and neuroscientific research indicates that when we step into ‘gratitude mode’ (even if we don’t feel like it or need to force it somewhat), our brain will start to naturally produce more feelgood chemicals such as dopamine, serotonin and oxytocin. In short, remembering what you have to feel grateful for will improve your mood and reduce anxiety, quickly. And the more you do it, the more effective it becomes. I know it sounds simple, but the science is convincing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">So, remaining seated and with your eyes closed, think of three aspects of your life that you are grateful for as part of your third minute of self-therapy, whether that be your friends, family, pets, work, home, finances, health, even the weather that day. Absolutely anything that you are grateful for.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you have identified the three areas, say them aloud to yourself and repeat them a couple of times if that feels helpful. The research indicates that expressing gratitude using language, even to yourself, consolidates the beneficial impact.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you have done this, take a few deep breaths and observe any shifts in mood or emotion. <span aria-label="page 154. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_154" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Then let it go and move on to the next stage of your third minute: setting your intention for the day.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">INTENTION</p>
<p class="noindent_para">We can make any day better by starting it with a healthy intention. Now, having an intention for the day doesn’t necessarily mean your intention will be granted. You may set out with an intention to become a millionaire but that doesn’t mean it will happen!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s revisit the work you did in <a href="9780008378288_Chapter04.xhtml#ch4">Chapter 4</a> on the changes you want to make in your life that will bring you a better future, and the work you did in <a href="9780008378288_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">Chapter 5</a> around authenticity and living your life with new, more flexible rules, beliefs and values that work for you. When you set out your intention for the day, I encourage you to gear it towards what truly matters to you and makes you feel genuinely happy, connected and at peace, rather than materialistic or ego-driven desires.</p>
<p class="indent_para">With your eyes closed and seated quietly, focus on articulating three intentions for the day ahead. If it’s helpful, I’ll share with you my intentions today:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>I will show up and do my best</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 155. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_155" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>I will look after myself, particularly if I’m feeling overwhelmed</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I will try to be understanding and compassionate with those I interact with today</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">Your intentions will vary daily but keep in mind that their purpose is to act as an anchor for your day that keeps your steady. If you go off track at any point in the day, you can remind yourself of your intentions and come back to a stable base.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 4: GROUNDING</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Being ready for your day involves grounding. By this I mean steadying your mind and body. Although this is a short grounding minute, you are free to stay with this exercise longer if you would like to and if time allows.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As you know from your foundation work, your mind is often incredibly busy with lots of thoughts (many of them unhelpful). A busy mind creates stress, and when you’re stressed, your body creates more cortisol. This leads to a strong sympathetic nervous system response. That is, your mind and body flip into ‘threat mode’: <span aria-label="page 156. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_156" role="doc-pagebreak"/>they expect danger or harm, so are primed for action. This leads to both a physiological and hormonal reaction that leaves you feeling jittery or on edge.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you start the day slowing down this process, you send a message to the brain informing it that it doesn’t need to be in ‘threat mode’ all the time. This helps deactivate the flurry of activity that we know as stress or anxiety.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There are many grounding techniques that people use to quieten the mind and relax the body. If you have a particular one that works for you, then use it.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For those new to the concept of grounding I am going to use what I consider to be one of the most effective grounding techniques. I use this technique regularly with clients and I’ve mentioned it before in my previous books.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">HOW TO GROUND</p>
<p class="noindent_para">I want to start by stating that grounding takes practice, but once you’ve done it a few times and gotten the hang of it, it will make sense. I encourage you to use the same routine every day, as this part of the self-therapy process will become your <i>safe place</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Remain seated with your eyes closed and follow these three steps:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span aria-label="page 157. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_157" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="num-font">In your imagination, go to a place that represents beauty and peace. (Use the same place every day for a sense of familiarity and safety.) Allow yourself to experience everything you can about this place: the colours, the sounds, the smells, the sensations, the tastes. Gently breathe and enjoy the tranquillity of where your mind has brought you. You are using your imagination to adjust your mindset.</span></li>
<li class="num-gt"><span class="num-font">When you are relaxed, choose a word that is going to help your mind identify that you’ve come to your safe place. As before, you’re going to use the same word every day. It could be any word, but I tend to find something like ‘peace’ or ‘calm’ or ‘joy’ works for my clients. Simply say the word aloud to yourself a few times. You are using language to reinforce a calmer state.</span></li>
<li class="num-gt"><span class="num-font">Finally, as you sit in this place of peacefulness, simply use your hands to tap each thigh alternately, left to right in a <i>slow</i> rhythm. A fast rhythm will not be helpful. You can do this for 20 to 30 seconds. You are using a technique called bilateral stimulation. <span aria-label="page 158. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_158" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Essentially, your imagination has gone to a calm place and your chosen word reinforces that. The act of tapping while you are practising this technique is a further physical reinforcer. It sends a message to the brain that you don’t need to be in ‘threat mode’ anymore. The steady tapping rhythm creates a sense of ease and facilitates the grounded feeling.</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="indent_para">When you’ve finished, open your eyes and reorientate yourself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The <b>ready</b> stage of your daily self-therapy is complete and you are now ready to face your day, whatever it brings.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You have, in four minutes:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Checked in with your emotional state and the state of your body and mind</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Figured out what you need for the day</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Practised gratitude</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Grounded yourself</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">You will come back to your daily self-therapy practice for three minutes in the early afternoon. This will be the <span class="gray-color"><b>steady</b></span> section of your day. It will help keep you strong, focused and on track.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>