<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 10: All’s well that ends well</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 230. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_230" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch10"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch10">10</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch10">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch10"><b>All’s well that ends well</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">I</span> started this book by sharing some insights into the world of therapy, and hopefully demystifying it. I want to end it by reinforcing the power of therapy with some real stories of transformation in the lives of my clients. I want to remind you that, whatever has happened, there is always hope. Something good can be salvaged from almost any situation – maybe not straight away, but eventually.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Before I do that, though, a few thoughts on what happens after you finish reading this book.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m always struck when I finish reading a book and experience a range of now-familiar emotions:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 231. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_231" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Sadness that it’s ended</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Loneliness that I won’t have the writer’s voice or characters with me</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Elation if there’s a happy ending</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Frustration if it ends on a cliff-hanger</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Disappointment if I didn’t get the ending I wanted</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Challenged if the book has awakened my mind to issues I was previously unaware of</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Angry if characters I liked found themselves in situations that are unfair or unjust</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Inspired to make changes or do something new</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">You too may experience some unexpected feelings as this book ends, but not just because it’s a book. This is a therapy book. Endings in therapy provoke emotions. I think it’s important to take a moment here to acknowledge that.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If coming to the end of this book has brought strong feelings to the surface, that’s completely understandable and to be expected. You may feel a little sad that a familiar voice is gone. You may feel frustrated that you have work to do. You may feel excited by the prospect of new possibilities. You may feel disappointed that I haven’t sorted out all your problems.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 232. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_232" role="doc-pagebreak"/>The exciting news is that you now know how to recognise, manage and work with these feelings. They aren’t abnormal. You are dealing with an ‘ending’ of sorts and we need to take note of your emotional responses to that. It’s an important part of the process in therapy to acknowledge the end of a therapeutic relationship. It’s part of the closure process. It helps with a sense of completion.</p>
<p class="indent_para">On the other hand, it may have been the <i>process</i> of reading this that was more emotional for you. Remember I said at the start that good therapy isn’t fluffy and warm all the time. If it’s made you a little uncomfortable or uneasy at points, then that’s great (and I mean that in the kindest possible way). I’m doing my job and you are responding. Change is uncomfortable.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Equally, the book will hopefully have awakened thoughts of a better future and discoveries of new strengths. If you realise that you are now looking at life and situations through a different lens, that’s great too. Again, I’m doing my job and you are responding.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Consequently, you might realise there are some areas of your life that you want to change. I encourage you to go at a steady, considered pace and try not to change everything at once. Take it one step at a time. The next best step is enough and that’s all there is to manage.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 233. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_233" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I hope the book has challenged you and inspired you to take the time to switch into a therapy mindset. But – and this is the important bit – you will only notice improvements if you commit to this work. I regularly encounter clients who want me, as the therapist, to make everything better for them. It doesn’t work that way. It takes work.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In this book <i>you</i> are the therapist, and <i>you</i> are also doing the work. Reading the book isn’t going to be enough. This is a book that requires action long after you have finished reading. But it will be worth it. The more you show up to practise what you have learnt here, the better you will feel. Your life will improve. Try to think of it like going to the gym. The more you apply yourself, the greater the results.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m equally aware you might decide that the techniques in this book aren’t enough for you. You may want to get professional help with issues that you are finding difficult. You might decide you want to have some one-to-one therapy! And if that is the case, congratulations on getting to that point. If this book has helped you make that decision, then equally, my work is done.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If you decide on one-to-one therapy with another therapist, a few tips. Finding a therapist that’s right for you can be like finding a needle in a haystack. <span aria-label="page 234. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_234" role="doc-pagebreak"/>My advice is to ask around. Recommendations from people you know, or from your doctor, will help you identify the right therapist for you. There is also some useful online advice from mental health charities such as MIND and SANE.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s important that you know what therapy models your therapist is trained in. Ask questions about their qualifications and experience. It is also wise to check they are fully qualified and accredited with a recognised regulatory body. This varies from country to country so you will need to check what those are in your region.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Whatever your experience has been reading this book, it’s over to you now. I hope you feel empowered to live a fuller life with the information and skills you now have. I hope that prospect excites you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But before I say goodbye, as promised, let me share with you a few stories of clients I’ve worked with who have inspired me. The stories I share with you focus on people who have experienced the worst of times and worked through it. They also learnt to become their own therapist (which, as I said at the start, is always my ultimate goal). They live the principles of this book.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I hope they inspire you as they inspired me. I hope they encourage you to walk this path.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 235. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_235" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">MARGO: THE GLITTER BALL STAYS</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Margo came to see me seventeen years after the death of her daughter. She had seen many therapists since the loss of her daughter, and their focus had been on grief or depression. But her level of distress during our introduction raised a suspicion in my mind that something else was going on.</p>
<p class="indent_para">She told me about the loss of her beautiful daughter on holiday. She was 21 and died in a tragic accident. Margo couldn’t come to terms with the loss.</p>
<p class="indent_para">By the end of our first session, I had no doubt Margo was grieving her daughter and experiencing secondary mood symptoms, but the missing link soon emerged. She was also deeply traumatised by her daughter’s death. There were several traumatic memories including seeing the body for the first time, the funeral and her imaginings of what happened on the day of the accident. She was experiencing PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder) and met diagnostic criteria for treatment. Trauma that is not processed won’t settle until it is treated. (I interject here with a reminder that if symptoms associated with trauma, anxiety or low mood are not improving after two to three months or so of consistent self-therapy and changes to your behaviour, always speak with a professional.)</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 236. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_236" role="doc-pagebreak"/>We focused initially on Margo’s trauma during her therapy sessions. Within several weeks Margo was showing improvements. Fast forward to a few months later and she’d booked a cruise holiday with her friend. She came back having had the most incredible holiday and for the first time in seventeen years she felt like her ‘life was coming back’. She started to socialise again. She started painting again (a hobby she’d previously loved). Generally, she started to engage more with her life. But she didn’t stop there.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Margo’s house had been unchanged since her daughter’s death, including her daughter’s bedroom. She decided to renovate. When she was planning the renovations, she explained to the builders that the bedroom couldn’t be touched. It had become a shrine to her daughter, and no one could enter the room. It was also therapeutically representative of how ‘stuck’ Margo had become.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We discussed this sense of ‘stuckness’ in therapy. Margo eventually recognised this and agreed to instruct the builders to renovate her daughter’s bedroom too. But there was one condition: <i>the glitter ball stays</i>. The glitter ball was one of her daughter’s favourite possessions. Margo believed it captured the essence of her daughter’s fun and energy.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 237. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_237" role="doc-pagebreak"/>The bedroom is now an art studio. Margo now paints regularly under the sparkle of the glitter ball. She has rekindled the spark in her own life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Alongside Margo’s trauma treatment there were several other therapeutic factors that helped in her recovery.</p>
<p class="indent_para">She discovered that taking time out each day to be her own therapist was important. She realised connecting with people and reconnecting with life was part of her recovery. She discovered that some of her unnecessary guilt was linked to years of unhelpful rules and beliefs. Above all, she realised that facing and dealing with the awful reality of her loss was the only way forward. For years, she has been focused on her own sadness and managing the symptoms of that sadness. Facing the trauma around her loss was her first step towards healing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I share Margo’s story with you because she is someone who taught me a lot about the journey from hopelessness to hope. She also taught me that in the world of therapy, sympathy and platitudes aren’t enough. Sometimes the work is challenging and requires us to go to dark places. Often, that is the way through.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Margo’s grief and sadness had become a familiar safe place for her to go. During therapy I was gradually moving her away from this, <span aria-label="page 238. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_238" role="doc-pagebreak"/>not because we were avoiding the sadness, but because it was preventing her from living.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I don’t believe any of us ever truly ‘get over’ the big losses in our life. We get through. And that’s enough and perhaps how it should be.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Margo’s journey of seventeen years was a long road. And I reminded her that there would be times when it would feel like she’d been thrown back into the deep end of her grief again. But she now has the insight, wisdom and skills to become unstuck. This is the power of therapy. She is now her own therapist.</p>
<p class="indent_para">So, if you’re feeling stuck today in the same sad, angry or despairing thought cycles, there is always a way forward. There is always a glitter ball to be found somewhere in the dark. Margo’s story teaches us that.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">KYLE: WHY AM I ALWAYS SCARED?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Kyle came to therapy reluctantly. His girlfriend thought it was a sensible idea, so he decided to ‘give it a go’. He was one of the people I mentioned earlier in the book who thought therapists and therapy might be ‘a bit weird’. Thankfully, I managed to convince him otherwise.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 239. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_239" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Kyle was experiencing significant anxiety symptoms that he couldn’t make sense of. His first question to me was, ‘Why am I always scared?’</p>
<p class="indent_para">He experienced worry about most things, most days. He wasn’t sleeping well, and he was difficult to be around (according to his girlfriend). He was experiencing generalised anxiety disorder (a diagnostic label that I prefer not to use. Instead, I describe a sufferer as someone who has learnt to worry lots).</p>
<p class="indent_para">Kyle grew up in a small mining community in the north of England. When he was telling me his life story, I noticed his father was absent from most of the story. There was nothing particularly remarkable about Kyle’s story. He didn’t mention any significant traumas. He described family life as ‘normal’ (always a giveaway). His school life, university life and social life were all areas in which he appeared to function very well. He simply worried all the time and didn’t know how to stop. In short, he was a high-functioning worrier, which is very common.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As I got to know Kyle better, I mentioned to him that I noticed his father was absent from his life story. His father had died a few years earlier. He initially dismissed this as insignificant, saying they simply didn’t get on. A few questions later and it was a different story.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 240. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_240" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Kyle’s father was a violent alcoholic for most of his formative years. Kyle and his family members were often physically and verbally attacked by his father during ‘drinking binges’. When his father was sober, he was highly critical of everyone in the family. The situation was complicated by his mother, who didn’t want anyone outside of the family to know about the drinking or violence. There was a family dynamic of secrecy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It won’t surprise you to know that consequently Kyle grew up with lots of unhelpful beliefs about himself and how to cope with life. His confidence was low. His anxiety was high. He was fearful, but also believed he had to be at his best in life, no matter what. That was his family script. We were able to answer his question, ‘Why do I worry so much?’</p>
<p class="indent_para">I share Kyle’s story with you because understanding his story was central to improving his anxiety. He had normalised his childhood and his father’s behaviours. The reality is that they were a major contributor to his anxiety. Once he understood that, he was able to stop hiding his feelings and looking out for danger all the time, and he could let go of patterns of secrecy and people-pleasing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">He had been ‘hard wired’ to worry. His daily self-therapy practice involved rewiring his brain to respond with a calmer, <span aria-label="page 241. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_241" role="doc-pagebreak"/>more adaptive approach. He had nothing to fear anymore. His brain needed that message to be reinforced.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Kyle learnt the skills of managing his anxiety by using self-therapy, just as we have done together. He practised checking in with his mind, body and emotions every day. He learnt how to ‘ground’ himself. He was able to challenge unhelpful thinking, and rules and beliefs that didn’t serve him anymore. Ultimately his self-therapy taught him how to practise self-care, how to look after himself and how to help himself feel safe.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Several weeks into therapy and daily practice, Kyle began to improve. His anxiety dropped and he reported that his girlfriend had noticed remarkable changes in his behaviour. He worried less. His sleep improved and he was easier to be around. He generally felt happier.</p>
<p class="indent_para">At our last therapy session Kyle brought a small gift to our session. It was a postcard he had found in a shop. It read: <i>Your past doesn’t define you</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I have kept his card. Sometimes I show it to clients and tell them Kyle’s story (protecting his identity, of course).</p>
<p class="indent_para">I hope his story reminds you that you are not defined by the adversities of your past. You can recover. You don’t have to be scared.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<div><span aria-label="page 242. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_242" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<p class="chap_h3">OWEN: SMALLTOWN BOY</p>
<p class="noindent_para">You may remember at the beginning of the book that my own therapy inspired me to become a therapist. It seems fair that I share a little more about that. The final case study is mine.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Some models of therapy actively discourage therapists from sharing their stories with clients. I understand the thinking behind this as the focus should always be on the client. But I also believe that a client needs to know they are in the presence of another human being who understands struggle. Sometimes that involves a degree of self-exposure. If I am asking someone to share their deepest, darkest secrets with me, I feel I owe it to them to reveal some of my own humanity. I follow the same principle with this book. I am sharing how therapy can help you. I could use hundreds of examples of clients I have worked with but I also have to give something of myself. It is my duty and responsibility to practice what I preach.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Therapy for me really was a journey to self-acceptance. I described earlier in the book my first therapy session. I thought I was fine. I wasn’t. Therapy taught me that I was filled with shame and that I hadn’t accepted my sexuality. I was anxious. I was frightened of taking risks in my life. I wasn’t comfortable in my own skin.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 243. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_243" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This all became clear when I told my story in therapy and then tried to make sense of it. A combination of experiences contributed to my struggles. Witnessing a lot of sectarian violence in Northern Ireland during The Troubles was one. Growing up gay in a Catholic culture of judgement and shame was another. And there was the bullying and rejection during my school years, plus a host of other adverse life events.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Consequently, I didn’t feel safe, I didn’t feel good enough, I didn’t fit in and I didn’t know how to be me. But therapy helped me understand why I felt this way, even though my school days were behind me. It saved me.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I learnt not to give myself a hard time. These experiences in my life had happened to me but they didn’t define me. Once I understood that, I realised I could work on my negative patterns. I discovered that self-doubt, anxiety and struggle could be turned around. The techniques I have shared with you have been my way through. They still play an active part in my life today.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Despite the impact of negative experiences on my life, I realised that treating myself well and changing my mindset could reverse the effect of those experiences. This was a powerful revelation. That is the power of therapy. You don’t have to be a victim of your past.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 244. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_244" role="doc-pagebreak"/>One of my favourite songs is ‘Smalltown Boy’ by Bronski Beat. The lyrics tell a story very similar to my own. At points in my life, I too had ran away or turned away. But therapy took me in a different direction. I stopped running away. I faced my story bravely, learnt to celebrate it even, and transformed my life.</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts">I refuse to let my past struggles define me. But I will use them to support my work as a therapist, writer and speaker. This is one of the ways that I’ve been able to salvage something wonderful from the wreckage of darker times.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I now live my life practising what I have passed on to you in this book. Living this way keeps me grounded, focused and hopeful for the future.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Sometimes I fall and get it wrong. I get up again.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Sometimes I make mistakes. That’s OK. I learn from them.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Sometimes I get a little lost. I find my way back.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I hope you find you can do the same. This book can be your roadmap, keeping you on the straight and narrow. It can help you find your way back.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Remember that you never have to stay physically, mentally or emotionally in places that are not healthy for you. Sometimes you may need to physically get away from somewhere, <span aria-label="page 245. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_245" role="doc-pagebreak"/>but don’t run away from what’s going on inside you. Face it all. Let it teach you. Then take the best steps for you.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">TIME TO SAY GOODBYE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">I must confess, I’m not a fan of goodbyes. I find them difficult. They make me sad. I previously avoided them.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I now know they are important. They honour an experience. They add a sense of completion. They enable moving forward. They close a chapter. They open new chapters.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This is my third book and what I’ve learnt is that writing self-help books is an illuminating experience. Each time I sit down to write, I imagine I am speaking directly to the reader. Sometimes readers send me messages telling me that my books have changed their lives. And that feedback is life-changing for me, too. I love feeling that synergy with readers.</p>
<p class="indent_para">With that in mind, I want to say goodbye and thank you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Thank you for reading this book and trusting my experience and this process. Facing your story truthfully will lead you to freedom. Learning to navigate your mind, <span aria-label="page 246. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_246" role="doc-pagebreak"/>emotions and behaviours will empower you.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Goodbye for now and hello to a future of new possibilities.</p>
<p class="noindent_para_top">If you would like to find out more about my work, please see:</p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts">Instagram and Twitter <a href="https://twitter.com/@owenokaneten">@owenokaneten</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Website: <a href="http://www.owenokane.com">www.owenokane.com</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Other books: <i>Ten to Zen, Ten Times Happier</i></p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>