<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Introduction</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="introduction" role="doc-introduction">
<div><span aria-label="page 1. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_1" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="fm_head_2" epub:type="title" id="intro"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_intro"><b>Introduction</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">I</span>’m a therapist and, like most therapists, I’ve been to therapy. It changed my life. In fact, therapy affected me so profoundly that I was inspired to become a therapist myself.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I believe therapy has the potential to change everyone’s lives for the better. But here’s the problem. It isn’t cheap, it’s hard to access and there are often waiting lists spanning years. And let’s not forget, there’s still some degree of stigma attached to therapy! But if you’re feeling at all hesitant, consider this: sometimes our brains need a little maintenance and looking after to help us deal with life’s challenges. And that’s what good therapy helps with. It’s nothing weird or freaky. <span aria-label="page 2. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_2" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I promise that you won’t end up living in a forest or hiding away in a cave. Therapy is for the courageous and what it delivers is true strength and endless possibilities for a fuller life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">After musing on the challenges associated with helping people to get the therapy they need, I had a brainwave. The goal of most therapy is for clients to finish a block of sessions ‘skilled up’ and ‘aware’ enough to become their own therapist. So I realised that I needed to write a book that taught people how to do exactly that.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Welcome to <i>How To Be Your Own Therapist</i>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I want this book to be a practical resource that anyone can use. This is not detailed psychoanalysis, and I say that completely unapologetically.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I have the deepest respect for my colleagues who work differently to me, but this isn’t a heavyweight academic clinical book. Instead, it aims to simplify complicated theories and make them useable in everyday life. The first half of the book will take you on a personal therapeutic journey, before we get to the daily ten minutes of self-therapy in the second half of the book. We need that first half, otherwise your daily practice won’t make any sense. I like to think of the first half as creating a ‘new you’; it’s like a crash course in therapy, or therapy bootcamp, if you like. The second half is the daily maintenance.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 3. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_3" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In this book, I will teach you how to access the therapist within you and make the best of each day – whatever is going on for you. The skills you’ll learn will help you to function better, feel better and live better for the rest of your life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">One final declaration that might come as a bit of a surprise. <i>I</i> am not going to change you. I am offering you my insights, learning and experience. It is <i>your choice</i> what you do with it. Too many books, ‘gurus’ and professionals promise to change your life. I can’t do that. But I do believe <i>you</i> can change your life.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>ABOUT ME</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">First and foremost, I’m a human being with weaknesses, vulnerabilities and a back catalogue of mistakes like most people. I know from personal experience what it means to be imperfect. I believe this helps a lot in my line of work!</p>
<p class="indent_para">I think we have too many people telling us to do more, be more and buy more, instead of helping us understand how we can live our present lives better and with less struggle. My other bugbear is how often we’re told to ignore the warning signs that life is getting on top of us. It’s all well and good being told, <span aria-label="page 4. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_4" role="doc-pagebreak"/>‘You’ve got this!’ but sometimes we haven’t, and we might need a helping hand along the way.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I have a dual medical and psychotherapy background. Before I became a psychotherapist, I was a palliative care specialist. My final job in the NHS was as Clinical Lead for Mental Health in London. I now run my own private therapy practice in London, but I see clients from all over the world. I also deliver talks and workshops internationally on issues related to mental health.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I grew up in Northern Ireland during The Troubles: a period of intense violence between Nationalists and Unionists. It was a challenging childhood. During my own therapy I discovered that, as a result, I was ‘hardwired’ to be in a perpetual state of fear, watching out for the next problem. I’ve since worked on that.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m also gay, which meant a lot of interesting conversations while in therapy. Being Irish, Catholic and gay was a conundrum for me. Catholicism in my formative years preached about ‘praying the gay away’. So it’ll come as no surprise that some of my biggest revelations in therapy were that I tended to consider myself the underdog, and I regularly felt the need to prove my decency as a human being. Therapy taught me I didn’t need to prove anything. Instead, I learnt the joy of self-acceptance.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In this book, I will share the personal discoveries I made about myself with you, <span aria-label="page 5. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_5" role="doc-pagebreak"/>to demonstrate what is possible with therapy. I’m talking about breakthroughs. Transformation. I am confident you will realise both by reading this book.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>HOW DOES THIS BOOK WORK?</b></p>
<p class="chap_h3">THIS BOOK IS DIVIDED INTO TWO PARTS.</p>
<p class="noindent_para"><a href="9780008378288_Chapter01.xhtml#ch1">Chapters 1</a> to <a href="9780008378288_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">5</a> make up <a href="9780008378288_Part01.xhtml#pt1">Part 1</a>. This is the essential foundation work that sets you up for your ten minutes of daily therapy practice, which is covered in <a href="9780008378288_Part02.xhtml#pt2">Part 2</a>. You will need a notebook and a pen to do this work, so be sure you have both ready. <a href="9780008378288_Part01.xhtml#pt1">Part 1</a> includes everything you’d usually cover in therapy with me. There are no shortcuts here, so I encourage you to stick with the work. It’s life-changing. It will also help you understand the importance of your ten minutes of daily self-therapy. In <a href="9780008378288_Part01.xhtml#pt1">part 1</a> we will look at:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Your ‘real’ life story</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Making sense of your story and how it affects you today</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">What you really want from your life</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span aria-label="page 6. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_6" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="num-font">How therapy can help you get what you want</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">The essential ingredients necessary for a more contented life</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="indent_para">I’ll explain what I mean when I say <i>your ‘real’ life story</i> (since this concept is at the heart of therapy).</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s not simply your recollection of the events of your life in chronological order. What it means is sharing with another person the key events in your life <i>that mattered to you</i> and, more importantly, <i>how they made you feel</i>. This will include experiences that are positive, negative and everything in between.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Often, we tell ourselves and others versions of our story that are ‘rehearsed’ or ‘respectable’, to influence how we want people to see us, as opposed to how we really are. I believe that most people adapt their life stories automatically as a defence mechanism rather than consciously. But personal development and growth only happen when we’re able to accept the true events of our past and express them, together with how they made us feel then and how they make us feel now.</p>
<p class="indent_para">That said, it’s not enough to just tell your story. Your story also needs to be formulated so that you can connect how and why your experiences have impacted on your emotions, behaviours and ways of thinking today. <span aria-label="page 7. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_7" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This will be the second step in your foundation work. Once you’re able to do this, everything will become clearer.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We then explore what you want for your future and how to make that future a reality. There is no point doing this work unless it’s going to bring some incredible changes to your life. Knowing what you want is crucial, otherwise you may feel directionless.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Making changes to your life so your future looks different from your past will also involve letting go of some of the self-enforced rules you live by that are holding you back. Together, we will work on that.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In the final part of the foundation work, we’ll be looking at some essential techniques and self-care tools that you’ll be integrating into your ten minutes of daily therapy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Understanding who you are, why you act as you do, knowing what you want and what to let go of will open the way to a sense of calm, control and clarity.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><a href="9780008378288_Chapter06.xhtml#ch6">Chapters 6</a> to <a href="9780008378288_Chapter10.xhtml#ch10">10</a> make up <a href="9780008378288_Part02.xhtml#pt2">Part 2</a>. This half of the book will teach you how to do your ten minutes of daily self-therapy. Here, you’ll learn how to integrate techniques learnt in <a href="9780008378288_Part01.xhtml#pt1">Part 1</a> into your daily life, and you’ll be shown some new ones too. Both will improve your life for the better. This will be your maintenance work. You can do this for as long as you feel you need to. <span aria-label="page 8. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_8" role="doc-pagebreak"/>You might feel that you’d benefit from doing some form of this every day indefinitely, making it as much a part of your daily routine as your morning tea or coffee. Your daily therapy is also an opportunity to work on the issues you’ll have uncovered while doing the work in <a href="9780008378288_Part01.xhtml#pt1">Part 1</a>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here is a summary of what your daily ten-minute practice will look like, at a glance. I know how demanding life can be, so I’ve split the ten minutes evenly across your day. This way, no matter how busy you are, you can always make time to check in with yourself. The aim is that these therapy ‘boosts’ will transform the quality of your day, and ultimately your life!</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>READY</b></span></p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>How long?</b></span> Four minutes</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>When?</b></span> Preferably at the start of your day whenever you can find a gap. I try to think of this time as like brushing my teeth! We all find time to brush our teeth for a few minutes at the start of the day, so why shouldn’t we prioritise our mental wellness in the same way?</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>What’s it for?</b></span> Quietening the chatter inside your head and shifting your mindset into a more flexible, adaptive place that helps you get the most out of your day.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span aria-label="page 9. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_9" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="gray-color"><b>STEADY</b></span></p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>How long?</b></span> Three minutes</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>When?</b></span> After you’ve had your lunch.</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>What’s it for?</b></span> Keeping you steady for the day and managing any setbacks that may have taken place. Regulating how you think and react, and ensuring you psychologically look after yourself as the day progresses.</p>
<p class="extract_ts"><span class="gray-color"><b>REFLECT AND RESET</b></span></p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>How long?</b></span> Three minutes</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>When?</b></span> Just before you go to bed, you’re comfortable, you have nothing more to do and you’re undistracted by your phone.</p>
<p class="extract"><span class="gray-color"><b>What’s it for?</b></span> Exploring the lessons from the day and letting go of unhelpful thoughts to enable a full night’s sleep.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent_para">The ten minutes of daily self-therapy I teach you in this book will be life-affirming, and transformative. They will also be a time when your entire self will be acknowledged and accepted with compassion. Having said that, some of the questions, exercises and suggestions in this book will be taking you outside of your comfort zone. That’s unavoidable. Therapy <i>should</i> get under your skin (in a good way). But here’s the deal: it works. Think of it as a decluttering exercise for your mind, <span aria-label="page 10. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_10" role="doc-pagebreak"/>to help you function better.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Different therapists have different approaches, and I am going to teach you how to perform self-therapy in a very particular way, a way that other therapists might not. In short, the views in this book are mine. What I teach here is not representative of the views of any one professional or regulatory body. Instead, the work I’ll be taking you through in this book takes an integrative approach based on my various trainings and personal experiences, and from knowing what works in clinical practice. It’s also informed by a range of therapy models rather than one single model (although I’ve taken care not to get too technical and stick with straightforward language). This integrative therapeutic approach will, I hope, bring ease and a sense of stability.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For interest, models of therapy used here include Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), Compassion Focused Therapy (CFT), Mindfulness, and Interpersonal Psychotherapy. For anyone with a particular interest in different therapy models, there’s a lot of useful information online, particularly on the websites of professional therapy organisations such as <a href="http://www.bps.org.uk">www.bps.org.uk</a>.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I will explain fully every part of the process as I guide you through it, <span aria-label="page 11. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_11" role="doc-pagebreak"/>in order, and I promise I’ll avoid jargon, clichés and psychobabble as much as I can. I am asking you to trust me, even in the moments when the questions I’m asking you may not make much sense, or if the process of doing the work makes you feel lousy. Therapy can be tough, but it should never overwhelm you. Work at a pace that’s comfortable for you and remember, there’s no rush. You have the rest of your life to work on this.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>A FINAL NOTE BEFORE WE BEGIN</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Throughout this book, I will share case studies aimed to provide support and help. It is for adults looking for a self-directed set of therapy tools to get the best from their day, their life and themselves. It is also for teenagers with the support from their parents. Wherever you are at, it will help. But it’s not a substitute for one-to-one live therapy, which some people will unquestionably need. If you do feel you need one-to-one or group professional support, please prioritise getting help via your doctor or local mental health organisations. There is a list of support organisations included at the end of the book.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Please also be mindful that it would not be sensible to engage with this work if you are feeling very overwhelmed, <span aria-label="page 12. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_12" role="doc-pagebreak"/>experiencing psychotic symptoms, feeling suicidal or don’t have adequate support around you. You will need professional help in these circumstances.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It is also not advisable to engage with this work if you are under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other unprescribed substances.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Finally, all names, details and case studies featured in this book have been changed, and any individuals or organisations mentioned have been anonymised, to protect and respect client confidentiality.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>