<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 7: Staying steady</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 159. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_159" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch7"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch7">7</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch7">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch7"><b>Staying <i>steady</i></b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">T</span>his chapter will focus on therapeutic techniques to keep you steady. While your morning practice was aimed at setting you up for the day, this part of your therapy is a leveller. It will keep you on track and help you deliver your authentic self for the remainder of your day. It takes three minutes to do but as before, if you have nothing else that requires your immediate attention, then feel free to spend a little more time with your practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It’s been well documented that few people take breaks in their day to focus on mental wellness. As we know from earlier chapters, it’s easy to fall into the trap of keeping going until we’re exhausted. And when you’re exhausted, <span aria-label="page 160. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_160" role="doc-pagebreak"/>it’s also easy to fall back into bad habits.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But mind maintenance and self-care are essential, as we know from our foundation work. It’s our responsibility to stop and make sure our minds are in a healthy place and that we’re looking after ourselves. This is what the next three minutes of self-therapy will focus on.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Sometimes we can have the best intentions for our day. But it doesn’t always go to plan. Setbacks, interruptions, conflict, illness, late trains, irritating people, unreasonable bosses and traffic jams can all play a part in changing the outcome of the day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I am reminded of a client called Meera, who would often fall victim to this. She would start her day with meditation practice. Then she went to the gym. She meditated again during her tea break and employed many well-known self-help techniques throughout her day. However, none of this, I noticed, prevented her day from becoming ‘terrible’.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When we explored this, I discovered Meera’s job as a surveyor was competitive and highly unpredictable. As we mapped out the deterioration of her day, it was often linked to how she was thinking and consequently behaving. When a deadline for a project shifted, she would begin to think, ‘I can’t cope, I’m going to fail.’</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 161. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_161" role="doc-pagebreak"/>When a colleague criticised her work she would think, ‘I’m not good enough,’ and ‘I look like a fraud.’ The problem was that Meera would heavily engage with these thoughts (because they were connected to her belief system, a concept you’ll remember from your foundation work). It didn’t stop there. When Meera fell into her thinking traps, she also fell into the trap of their related unhealthy behaviours. She would become argumentative with colleagues, then withdraw from them. Consequently, she would often feel isolated. This pattern would then carry on at home with her family.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Meera understood the <i>theory</i> of therapy but wasn’t putting it into practice. She was going through the motions of meditation, and from the outside it looked like she was doing everything she was supposed to be doing, but she needed to really <i>engage</i> with the work to change her thoughts and behaviours, then maintain those changes. She was addressing the top layer of the cake, which you may remember from earlier, but wasn’t making the changes that were needed to the middle and bottom layers.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For most people, bad days are more often a result of emotional responses to events than the events themselves. This is of course excluding more serious incidents such as bereavements, bad accidents, <span aria-label="page 162. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_162" role="doc-pagebreak"/>tragedies, etc., which will naturally evoke justifiably strong emotional reactions.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Similarly, the types of <i>behaviours</i> we engage in as a response to events can often have more of a negative effect on our day than the events prompting those behaviours. Healthy behaviours tend to lead to healthier days and vice versa.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This <b>steady</b> stage of your daily therapy will have three areas of focus over the three minutes. I encourage you before you start to take a separate moment to practise the grounding technique taught to you in the <b>ready</b> section of your work. This will get you into the right headspace before you begin.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I also want to encourage you to carry out these three minutes outdoors and while moving – for instance, during a walk. If this is difficult due to any physical limitations, I encourage you to sit outdoors or at least have a view of the outdoors. I also suggest you go somewhere quiet and away from distractions, ideally close to nature. There is lots of research indicating that even short walks in green spaces help reduce anxiety, lower blood pressure and promote a greater sense of wellbeing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Your morning practice was seated with eyes closed. This is more ‘active therapy’. The act of movement while focusing on your three areas will add a greater energy and momentum to your practice. <span aria-label="page 163. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_163" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It will also encourage you to step outside of the normal routines of your day. Habits change when you do new things.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The three areas of focus are:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1" epub:type="daisy:pullquote" role="doc-pullquote">
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 5 | Tweaking thinking traps and unhealthy behaviours</p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 6 | Healthy behaviour review</p>
<p class="extract2">MINUTE 7 | Random act of kindness</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent_para">I want to remind you that <i>you</i> are the therapist here, and you are engaging with <i>your</i> wisdom and insight to manage your own vulnerabilities or weaknesses, both of which <i>you</i> will understand better than anyone else.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Remember that every minute you engage with this process brings you a step closer to a healthier perspective. You’re retraining your brain, creating new neuropathways that enable your mind to function in more flexible ways. This isn’t just a three-minute walk or time outside. This is an intensive three-minute intervention that will shape your day.</p>
<div><span aria-label="page 164. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_164" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 5: TWEAKING THINKING TRAPS AND UNHEALTHY BEHAVIOURS</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Now that you’ve stepped out of your day and grounded yourself, let’s review your day so far, bringing your awareness to any tricky moments you’ve experienced.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As you reflect on the details of the events, ask yourself: how did I respond to that, emotionally? What negative thinking patterns were present? These could be, for example, assuming the worst, making assumptions based on what you think others are thinking (but probably aren’t), being in self-sabotage mode, believing that you’re the problem, or any other negative thought cycles that repeatedly visit you during times of sadness, anger and stress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Then ask yourself: what underlying beliefs triggered those negative thought patterns in me?</p>
<p class="indent_para">And, finally, ask yourself: what unhealthy or problematic behaviours have I engaged in today? These behaviours could have either been prompted by the negative events in your day so far, and the cascade of unhelpful thinking patterns and underlying beliefs that followed (for example, ‘Why did I argue with my boss?’, ‘Why did I ignore that call from my friend?’, <span aria-label="page 165. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_165" role="doc-pagebreak"/>‘Why did I arrive late for that meeting?’, ‘Why was I rude to that person in the shop?’), or they may have caused the negative events.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Flick back to here to see a <a href="9780008378288_Chapter05.xhtml#ss1">list of examples</a> of problematic behaviours that you might recognise from your day (although there are many others not listed there).</p>
<p class="indent_para">First, we’re going to look at tweaking your thinking traps.</p>
<p class="indent_para">To do this, we’re going to revisit the technique we learnt in <a href="9780008378288_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">Chapter 5</a> for reprogramming negative thought patterns.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Consider: what’s the evidence to support your negative thoughts? You’ll usually find there is little or none. Then: what helpful alternative thoughts can you replace your unhelpful thought with? Finally: it’s time to let go of that unhelpful thought.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’d like to recount this scenario, as experienced by a client of mine, Jake, which feels like a useful example at this point.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Jake has plans to meet a friend for lunch and they don’t turn up. To make matters worse, he spots a post on social media showing his friend having lunch with another friend. He is disappointed and furious.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In the heat of the moment, Jake messages his friend (using a few choice expletives), saying he doesn’t want to see him again and that their friendship is over.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 166. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_166" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Jake has been triggered by what he perceives to be a rejection from his friend, which has activated a host of negative thoughts and underlying beliefs Jake tends to revert to when faced with challenging experiences.</p>
<p class="indent_para">His thought patterns at the time of the event are:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Why would he do that?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I must be a rubbish friend</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>No one cares about me</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I’m going to end up alone</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I hate him for doing this</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I’m a loser</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">And so on.</p>
<p class="indent_para">His underlying beliefs are:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>I must have disappointed him. I’m a disappointment</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>This must be my fault</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>People always reject me</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>I’m not good enough</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">As you would expect, this experience impacts negatively on the rest of Jake’s day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Fast forward to later in the day, and Jake’s friend comes to see him at home. He is baffled by the text and doesn’t understand why Jake is angry with him. <span aria-label="page 167. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_167" role="doc-pagebreak"/>He shows Jake a text that he had received from him earlier in the morning that read, ‘Can’t make today, let’s rearrange for next week.’ Jake intended to send this text to a work colleague to cancel a meeting and mistakenly sent it to his friend, who made alternative plans for lunch!</p>
<p class="indent_para">None of Jake’s thoughts or interpretations were accurate. In psychology we call this ‘cognitive misinterpretation’. It causes drama and many problems for people. It’s incredible the stories our minds can produce. Many of us have the potential to write blockbuster movies!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Stop for a moment and consider how often you misinterpret others’ words, gestures, facial expressions and behaviours every day. Consider also how much distress this causes if you don’t stop to examine whether your initial assumption is true or not.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Jake could have called his friend to clarify the situation or recheck his messages. He could have factored in the history of a long-standing loyal friendship. But when he was triggered, he fell into the trap of a highly emotive response.</p>
<p class="indent_para">It is your responsibility, during this part of your practice, to be aware of where your thinking is at and of what amendments you can make to improve those thoughts. A bad day can be transformed instantly.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 168. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_168" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Next, we’re going to consider how we can respond better in the future to events triggering unhealthy behaviours. Because it’s natural and normal that other people and circumstances will continue to trigger you after this point, and you can’t stop those triggers. But you <i>can</i> learn to respond better.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Ask yourself the question: <i>What would a more helpful, flexible response be?</i></p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m aware that many of your automated negative behavioural responses have likely been part of your life for a long time. Changing these behaviours takes daily practice. But the more you can challenge these behaviours, the more progress you will make. Remember: every time you substitute a negative response with a healthier response, you change your neuropathways.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For example, maybe you have the same argument with your partner or housemate again and again where they are upset you haven’t washed the dishes (I think we’ve all been there). They feel you’re not respecting them. You react strongly with something hurtful and they become extremely upset. The atmosphere is tense.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Later, during self-therapy, you reflect, and recognise that some old behaviours were playing out. You were avoidant and self-focused in the first instance. When this is pointed out to you, patterns of anger, <span aria-label="page 169. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_169" role="doc-pagebreak"/>projection and defensiveness emerged. You made the other person the problem.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The reality is they aren’t. They have held up a mirror to you, reflecting your weaknesses and imperfections back at you. These are hard to accept. Even harder is the shame of someone else seeing those imperfections. So it’s easier to fight back. I wonder how often something like this happens in your day. In all our days! We are often at war with others without fully understanding why we feel so hurt and angry, often seemingly disproportionately so.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But I digress. Back to the dishes. What would a healthier psychological response look like? Let’s rewind. You haven’t done the dishes, your partner or housemate has gotten upset. They say you’re not respecting them.</p>
<p class="indent_para">At this point, your initial response is to be angry that your partner or housemate has challenged you and drawn attention to one of your weaknesses. But before you respond and do even more damage to your relationship with someone you care about and want to enjoy spending time with, you allow yourself a moment to pause. Perhaps you flag with the other person that you are taking a moment and will come back to them. This gives you the physical and mental space to reflect without your partner or housemate feeling stonewalled, <span aria-label="page 170. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_170" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and leaves the lines of communication open. In pausing, you notice that your partner or housemate is clearly upset.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You ask yourself two questions:</p>
<ol class="order-gray1" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g1">What’s going on with me now?</li>
<li class="num-g1">How can I respond well to this?</li>
</ol>
<p class="indent_para">A moment’s brief reflection helps you realise that you have been unreasonable, and that you are being avoidant and a little selfish. Acknowledge this to the other person and assure them that you will work on it. They respond calmly and say thank you. You then do the washing-up.</p>
<p class="indent_para">War has been avoided.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This is what I mean when I describe healthy responses and psychological flexibility. You have acknowledged, taken responsibility, and reacted respectfully. The difference in outcome is immense. Your day is calmer and more peaceful.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I know you may now be thinking, ‘But these arguments can happen so quickly. How do I stop this?’ The answer is simple. Always allow space for the red mist to dissipate. Rather than over-engage and react, you are going to quieten your mind and slow your responses so you can work out what’s going on. Then you can offer a considered, open, <span aria-label="page 171. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_171" role="doc-pagebreak"/>flexible response rather than a defensive reaction. The outcome will unquestionably be better.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m reminded here of a flight I took a couple of years ago. I was directed by a staff member into the wrong line when boarding the plane. I was in the first-class line, and I had booked economy. It was a busy flight, and as I was nearing the door I realised the error. My realisation that I’d made a mistake that couldn’t be corrected without me going to the back of an extremely long line, which in turn might lead to my luggage being put in the hold and getting lost (this had happened before), triggered a strong emotional reaction in me: fear of being reprimanded and humiliated in front of the other passengers. I then noticed a staff member walking towards me, and I was aware that my behaviour was about to become defensive and potentially argumentative. I was in ‘fight’ mode.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I paused for a second, noticing that there was a strong reaction going on for me. I immediately decided to switch modes. As the staff member approached, I smiled at her and explained I realised I was in the wrong line. Switching modes put me in a calmer headspace and meant I was able to think clearly enough to come up with a solution: asking the flight attendant if she wanted me to wait until the first-class passengers had boarded. She thanked me and looked relieved (I think she was expecting an argument). <span aria-label="page 172. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_172" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I stood aside and waited a few moments.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Shortly afterwards, I boarded the plane and proceeded to turn right towards the economy section. As I approached my seat a cabin crew member tapped me on the shoulder and asked me to follow him. They were upgrading me to first class!</p>
<p class="indent_para">One simple decision to be mindful of my reactions and consciously decide how to behave led to a very positive outcome. The only downside was that the flight was only five hours. I don’t like flying much, but I didn’t want that flight to end!</p>
<p class="indent_para">Healthy behaviours contribute to healthy outcomes. This part of your practice, where you consider healthy alternative responses to tricky situations you’ve encountered in your day so far, will help bring about more positive outcomes in the remainder of your day, and on subsequent days too.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 173. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_173" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 6: HEALTHY BEHAVIOUR REVIEW</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">Cognitive behavioural therapy is a type of therapy which supports the view that our behaviours directly impact our thoughts and emotions, and all three – emotions, thoughts and behaviours – are linked.</p>
<p class="indent_para">For the same reason, CBT also supports the idea that actions – as in, positive behaviour changes outside of therapy sessions – are just as important as talking within therapy sessions when it comes to improving our psychological wellbeing. Studies on depression indicate that people don’t improve with cognitive interventions alone; they need to be active and engaging with everyday life. And this is exactly what my approach is all about. Therapy <i>must</i> be about more than talking. In my view, it is utterly pointless to look at thoughts, emotions and psychological processes unless you are also willing to change your behaviours.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In my years of clinical experience, I’ve noticed that behavioural changes are sometimes disregarded by clients in therapy. Desires, promises and aspirations can be expressed, but are they followed through with actions? Rarely, unless those actions are explicitly encouraged in therapy sessions. So let me tell you what I tell them: if you aren’t prepared to change your daily behaviours, <span aria-label="page 174. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_174" role="doc-pagebreak"/>then I’m not going to be able to help you. It sounds harsh, but it’s true.</p>
<p class="indent_para">With that in mind, let’s move on to the second minute of your outdoor practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’d like you to consider what behaviours you’ve engaged in today that have activated you, spurred you on and made you feel positive. That could be jogging, going to a book club, learning to dance, walking in nature, meditating, painting, swimming, volunteering, or any number of other activities that represent ‘engaging with life’ for you. (As an aside, I have witnessed clients – such as Philomena with her gardening – making incredible transformations after integrating some of these behaviours into their lives, where previously they’d done very little to engage with life.)</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here are some questions to consider when reflecting on these positive behaviours:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>What have you done today in relation to personal fitness?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>How active, within your capabilities, have you been?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Apart from daily routine, what other healthy activities have you engaged in?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 175. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_175" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>What have you done today that has physically or mentally stimulated you?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>How engaged are you with life today?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Have you engaged in any behaviours today that are detrimental to your wellbeing? (e.g. excessive alcohol consumption, recreational drugs, excessive or nutritionally poor or too little food, unsafe sex or sex that doesn’t make you feel good, compulsive or excessive spending)</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">Depending on your routine, your response will likely vary day to day. But the idea is, over time, to become aware of your behaviour generally and whether it needs to change.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Which takes us to your commitment to more positive behaviours for the rest of the day. Consider the following questions, and let the answers guide you towards a more healthy and active rest of day:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>What’s my plan and commitment for fitness today?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>When can I find the time to do something active, within my capabilities?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>What can I do today that feels healthy and activates me?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 176. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_176" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>How can I stimulate myself today in a healthy way?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>How do I engage more with my life today?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>What behaviours do I need to drop today that don’t support me?</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para">Remember, this part of your practice is helping you regain a sense of control in the middle part of your day. Even if the day hasn’t gone well so far, this healthy behaviour review enables you to do something about that. You are the master of your behaviours. Your behaviour is not the master of you.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MINUTE 7: RANDOM ACT OF KINDNESS</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para">I deliberated long and hard about whether to include this in your daily practice.</p>
<p class="indent_para">While the concept of ‘acts of kindness’ is alluded to within some therapy models, its origins are in Eastern spirituality. Despite that, it seems we have a tendency, when we hear the words ‘kindness’, ‘self-care’, ‘compassion’, etc., to perceive these ideas as a little fluffy or even sanctimonious. But the type of kindness I’m talking about is more complex, nuanced and challenging (particularly in the moment) than a hashtag. <span aria-label="page 177. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_177" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Which makes sense, seeing as it’s about more than just what we say in person and online – it’s about changing our behaviour. (This pertains to my earlier point about actions speaking louder than words.) Anyone can use nice words, but it’s actions that count.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In the spirit of honesty, my reluctance to use the word ‘kindness’ results from the word’s common association with both social media and religion in modern society. I’m sure you’re already familiar with the hashtag #bekind. While the underlying message is positive, this hashtag crops up again and again in toxic Twitter threads, and is often used inconsistently to defend unkind and bullying behaviour.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The idea of kindness is approached similarly by some religions. As I’ve spoken about before, I was raised a Catholic, but despite priests and bishops preaching about ‘loving your neighbour’ (i.e. loving everyone, no matter their creed, colour, beliefs, etc.), and everyone being created equal, the Catholic Church hasn’t historically been kind to everyone. They marginalise many. Their words and actions don’t always match. I don’t want to get into an attack on religion or churches, because they also do some great work. My point is kindness and compassion must be for <i>everyone</i>, they should mean something and they aren’t words that should be just bandied about.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 178. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_178" role="doc-pagebreak"/>However, if integrated thoughtfully into our lives, kindness can be a powerful therapeutic force for positive change. I’ll explain more.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When we struggle as human beings, it is natural to turn in on ourselves. We can become introspective, self-focused, isolated and less interested in the needs of others. It’s a form of self-preservation. Sometimes this might serve a healthy purpose during a time of recovery or rest. But if it becomes a longer-term pattern, it’s problematic. It can exacerbate low mood, anxiety and general negative patterns. We know from research that an act of kindness towards another increases our sense of wellbeing. This happens for a few reasons. Every time you perform an act of kindness, you:</p>
<ul class="bullet1" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1">Get a chemical hit of dopamine, serotonin and oxytocin (the feelgood hormones)</li>
<li class="bull1">Feel connected to other people</li>
<li class="bull1">Break patterns of introspection</li>
<li class="bull1">Feel valuable and have a sense of purpose (i.e. helping another person feel better)</li>
<li class="bull1">Feel like you’re involved in working towards a common goal with other people to achieve the greater good</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 179. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_179" role="doc-pagebreak"/>For most of us it’s easier to be kind to those close to us as we have established relationships. It’s also easier to measure the impact of that kindness. And while I believe any act of kindness is a good thing, I also believe random acts of kindness towards those we may not know or be close to have greater power than acts of kindness towards those we know well.</p>
<p class="indent_para">What do I mean by that?</p>
<p class="indent_para">Those acts of kindness towards people we don’t know have more of an impact upon the <i>giver</i> of kindness – you – than the recipient <i>because</i> they are that little bit harder. The difficulty in performing that act of kindness makes the act itself more selfless, and when we are selfless, something incredible changes within us. We surpass our troubles. We momentarily forget we are in pain. Deep down, we know we have contributed to the greater good. We activate self-healing.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This is why I ultimately decided to include random acts of kindness into your daily therapy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Let’s move on to how you’ll be integrating a random act of kindness into your self-therapy and your day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Within this moment, take time to reflect on what random act of kindness you could commit to today, and how you will go about it. I’m not suggesting grand or expensive gestures like paying off someone’s mortgage or buying them a car. Instead, consider how you can make a difference to someone’s day by showing them you’re thinking of them. <span aria-label="page 180. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_180" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This could mean buying the homeless person on the street a sandwich, making a colleague a cup of tea because they look sad, giving way to a car trying to pull out, smiling at someone who looks isolated, speaking to someone who looks lonely, calling someone you know who is struggling, or cooking an elderly neighbour some dinner. Take inspiration from what brightens <i>your</i> day.</p>
<p class="indent_para">And the purpose of this minute in your practice isn’t simply restricted to thinking about what act of kindness you’ll perform that day. It’s also about reminding yourself of the power of random acts of kindness not only to others, but to yourself too.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Kindness isn’t just a trend or a hashtag. It’s a lifestyle choice. It’s therapy. It’s an act of rebellion.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The <b>steady</b> stage of your daily self-therapy is complete, and you are now ready to face the rest of your day, whatever it brings.</p>
<p class="indent_para">You have, in three minutes:</p>
<ol class="order-gray" epub:type="daisy:orderedlist">
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Done an inventory of your emotionally challenging moments so far today, and identified the negative thinking patterns, underlying beliefs and unhealthy behaviours that were present</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span aria-label="page 181. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_181" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="num-font">Formulated a plan of action for when you experience other similar situations that trigger those thinking patterns, beliefs and behaviours</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Reviewed healthy behaviours in your day so far and committed to integrating more healthy behaviours into your day</span></li>
<li class="num-g"><span class="num-font">Committed to a random act of kindness</span></li>
</ol>
<p class="indent_para">You will come back to your daily self-therapy practice for three minutes in the evening. This will be the <b>reflect and reset</b> section of your day. During this, your third and final self-therapy check-in, you’ll be exploring the lessons from the day, and letting go of unhelpful thoughts to enable a full night’s sleep.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>