<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 9: When life throws a major curve ball</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<div><span aria-label="page 203. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_203" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="chap_num" epub:type="title" id="ch9"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch9">9</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_num1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch9">Chapter</a></h1>
<h1 class="chap_title1" epub:type="title"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_ch9"><b>When life throws a major curve ball</b></a></h1>
<p class="noindent_para"><span class="stickupcap">M</span>ost of us know that life can throw unexpected curve balls. One day you’re feeling great, and everything is going well. You are happy. The next day, something seemingly catastrophic happens, and everything changes. It could be a bereavement, a breakup, redundancy, a failure, illness, an accident, a tragedy, even a natural disaster. It could be anything. Life is full of endless unexpected possibilities and sometimes they are extremely difficult to manage.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m writing this chapter eighteen months since reports of one such unexpected change – a virus called Covid-19 – started filtering into the news cycle. <span aria-label="page 204. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_204" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Most of our lives have been interrupted and challenged significantly since the beginning of 2020. Therapy has never been more needed due to the avalanche of uncertainty and chaos this event has caused. It’s been traumatic, and I believe we’re all going to feel the direct and indirect psychological consequences of the pandemic for a while yet. (This is something I speak to in the second edition of my last book <i>Ten Times Happier</i>, where I included a bonus chapter on dealing with trauma. I have coined the term ‘post-pandemic stress disorder’ to describe the psychological suffering caused by the pandemic.)</p>
<p class="indent_para">Yet, despite curve balls being a constant possibility, it’s important to avoid falling into the trap of frantically preparing for them, either psychologically or logistically. Most of the time, life offers a lot of joy. It’s a lot more sensible to live in the moment and deal with events should they happen (while working on your psychological flexibility so if they <i>do</i> happen, you can cope).</p>
<p class="indent_para">Nevertheless, I want to share with you some quick, high-impact coping strategies for those times of great adversity when your ten-minute daily self-therapy isn’t going to cut it, just in case you need them.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’m going to focus on five areas of adversity that all of us will encounter at points in our lives:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 205. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_205" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Bereavement</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Change</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Personal illness or taking on a caring role</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Disappointment</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Times of crisis</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">The therapeutic principles will remain the same but there are some specific considerations and adjustments that make particular challenges in your life more manageable.</p>
<p class="indent_para">More important than any of these, however, is remembering you have survived crises before, which means you can and do cope. I am simply offering you some additional tools and techniques that may help make those crunch points easier to handle.</p>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">BEREAVEMENT</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Loss is inevitable in life. We have all lost people we love. We will all continue to lose people we love. And that’s how it should be. It is the natural order: life and death.</p>
<p class="indent_para">As I mentioned earlier, the first half of my career was spent in palliative care environments working with people who were terminally ill. A large part of that role involved bereavement support for families after their loved one had died. I became familiar with the impact of loss, <span aria-label="page 206. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_206" role="doc-pagebreak"/>but I also became aware that grief impacts different people differently, and it doesn’t always look the same from the outside.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I believe pathologising grief (labelling it as a disorder) or suggesting that the grieving process is made up of predictable, easily defined psychological and behavioural ‘stages’ risks minimising a person’s loss by indicating that there is an end point by which time they should no longer be in pain. The idea of ‘the stages of grief’ can also make grieving people feel isolated or guilty because they’re not feeling what they’re ‘meant’ to feel. Grief is not that simple or predictable. Sometimes it can be complex, and people do become stuck, but it doesn’t mean there is anything wrong with them or how they’re grieving. It simply means someone is hurting deeply and finding it extremely difficult to adjust to a life without their loved one. Bereaved people need patience, time and a lot of understanding. A part of them has died, and that must be honoured.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Apart from my professional experience in this area, I am no stranger to grief personally. Each loss has been different, but all have felt raw. Healing from grief is painful.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This is what I know to be true about bereavement personally and professionally:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 207. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_207" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Emotions in the early stages of grief have no order or predictability. Sadness, anger, emptiness, bewilderment – in fact, any emotion – can erupt unexpectedly, like a volcano. All you can do is hold tight and wait until it passes.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>People won’t always understand your loss, and their insensitivity is more often linked to a sense of powerlessness than them not caring.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Guilt is a given. Grief will always raise questions: could I have done more? Should I have seen them more? I believe this is the mind’s way of distracting us from the reality that the person in our life has gone. If we think, wonder, doubt ourselves, maybe this cataclysmic event will make sense. And for those of us with self-critical thought patterns, our inner saboteur can have a field day during this time.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>There are no shortcuts to dealing with grief and there is no time limit.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Love is joyful. But it requires enormous courage, because, in loving, we also leave ourselves vulnerable to losing the one we love. It is the natural order of things.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 208. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_208" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>The pain eventually eases and it is possible to learn to live without the other person.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Life goes on, but it can never be the same. And that’s OK.</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">While there isn’t a ‘one-size-fits-all’ remedy for grief, the work you’ve done around self-care and self-compassion will be vital at this juncture. Looking after yourself during a period of grief is essential. Many of your physical and psychological resources will be significantly depleted. The death of someone you cared about is a huge blow. The mind and body need time to adjust.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Besides self-care and self-compassion, here are a few extra tips for how to deal with a bereavement:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Create as much space and time as possible to allow yourself to grieve.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Talk when you need to. Grief needs to be processed. Talking enables that to happen.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Ask for support when you need it.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Surround yourself with people who allow you to be sad when you need to be.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 209. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_209" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Create some flexibility in your routine. It’s impossible to go on as ‘normal’, particularly in the early days.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Remember, you are not falling apart – you are trying to come to terms with a significant loss.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Don’t be shamed into thinking there is a right or wrong way to grieve. This is a very individual journey.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>When you are ready, try to celebrate the good memories of the person you are grieving.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Manage your grief one step at a time. Hour by hour. Day by day.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Remember that you can survive this. You are hurting because you loved.</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">CHANGE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Our lives are in a constant state of flux. The next change is always just around the corner. But we tend to seek stability, predictability and order. Even adventurous personality types like a plan. And why do we seek stability? You may remember from your foundation work that ‘feeling safe’ is one of the most important contributors to healthy childhood development. Periods of change can threaten that feeling of safety in children, <span aria-label="page 210. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_210" role="doc-pagebreak"/>leaving them feeling unsettled and exposed. And it’s the same with adults, particularly when experiences trigger distressing memories of change during childhood. I notice my clients’ moods taking a dip or their anxiety rising during periods of transition. In psychology, we refer to these as ‘adjustment disorders’ but I prefer not to use the word ‘disorder’ to describe this feeling. I don’t think there is anything unusual about struggling in the face of change.</p>
<p class="indent_para">In summary, this is why we seek out routines. They’re a survival mechanism. They help us feel a bit more in control.</p>
<p class="indent_para">But the truth is that control is an illusion, because we <i>don’t</i> have control over life events. Which is why, while it’s positive and stabilising to establish routines, we must also embrace uncertainty and live in the now.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I once read a story about a monk who lived in the same monastery for twenty-five years. He was deeply peaceful and content. Every few years the monks would have a new superior who would come along and change some of the routines in the monastery. During one such period of change, the new superior suggested to the monk that he go travelling on a train for a year to experience uncertainty. He wanted him to broaden his perspective away from the monastery.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 211. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_211" role="doc-pagebreak"/>The monk became very unsettled about this, realising he had built his life around safety, predictability and avoiding challenges. But he understood that he needed to go on this journey.</p>
<p class="indent_para">He did so, and despite the sense of unease it brought, it led him down a path of personal growth. His meditation practices improved. He discovered many new personal strengths. He developed a greater sense of compassion. Interestingly, he never returned to the monastery. He took to life on the open road, fulfilling his duties as a monk in a more nomadic way. He found a new sense of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent_para">And just like the monk, while change (for instance, redundancy, a break-up, a house move, immigration or a new job) can often be at the heart of struggle and make our foundations feel unsteady, it can also be an opportunity for emotional and psychological growth.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The way through these periods of change is to face them courageously, embrace them as adventures, and approach them with excitement and curiosity, knowing there are lessons contained within these experiences if you choose to listen out for them. Who knows? There could be something incredible waiting on the other side.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 212. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_212" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">As before, the basic principles of therapy and your ten-minute practice apply.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Besides those basic principles, here are a few additional tips for how to cope with big changes in your life:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Create a sense of ‘internal’ familiarity by committing to some of your normal daily routines.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Push yourself to face and get involved with the day-to-day aspects of whatever the change is. This will feel uncomfortable, but that doesn’t mean it’s wrong. Work at a pace that you can manage without feeling overwhelmed.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Keep in contact with friends and family who are able to offer helpful support.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Observe your expectations and be aware that small steps at a gentle pace will be enough to start with.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Remind yourself that the vulnerable feelings you have may not be directly linked to the change but rather some old memories or beliefs that have been triggered.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 213. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_213" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Give it time. Adjusting to change requires patience and a lot of time.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Safety behaviours are likely to emerge in which you have a sense of wanting to run away from or avoid the change. Be mindful this is simply an anxiety mechanism, and doing the opposite will be more helpful longer term.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>There is no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way to feel during a period of change. Your experience is your experience. Turn up the self-compassion a few notches!</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Finally, a cliché but one I love: boats aren’t built to sit in harbours. Change means you are alive, and your life is moving forward in a new direction. Embrace it as best you can.</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">PERSONAL ILLNESS OR TAKING ON A CARING ROLE</p>
<p class="noindent_para">As a former nurse, I’m very aware of the impact illness and being a carer can have on a person. None of us knows when a period of illness or caring for another will come. But the likelihood is, it will. It’s part of life. I will look at how you can manage periods where you yourself are ill, and how you can manage when you’re in a caring role separately, as they both come with completely different sets of challenges.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 214. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_214" role="doc-pagebreak"/>I want to preface this section by saying that when I talk about ‘ill health’, I mean both physical and psychological. The human body and mind are complex, and sometimes they run into problems. We know from research that the mind and the body are interconnected. They can’t be considered in isolation.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Unquestionably, psychological ill health can contribute to poor physical health and vice versa. A person could be ill at home following a heart attack, but also very depressed as a result. A person trapped at home with agoraphobia could have cardiac problems because they aren’t able to exercise. We must move on from this antiquated approach of viewing physical and mental health as two separate issues. They are not. And I say that with total confidence, having spent my entire career in both worlds.</p>
<p class="indent_para">When you experience a period of illness, whatever the cause, your life can change suddenly and drastically. Aspects of daily life become temporarily or sometimes permanently interrupted: your social life, work, ability to see or spend time with your family, sex life, income and overall finances, how you spend your leisure time and so on. In short, the disruption to what you can do caused by your illness impacts significantly on your freedom, <span aria-label="page 215. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_215" role="doc-pagebreak"/>choices, decisions, interactions and how you feel. These changes can happen slowly too, which brings its own challenges: your quality of life can drop steadily over the course of weeks, months or years, but slowly enough that you barely notice the difference, until you wake up one day and your life is unrecognisable compared with the one you used to live. Whatever your experience of illness, coping isn’t easy. You are adapting to living with restrictions and limitations (whether in the short term or longer term – or perhaps you may have no idea how long your recovery is likely to take, and that ‘not knowing’ can be extremely challenging, too). This doesn’t feel fair. Coming to terms with your situation, especially when we’re talking about chronic illness, is difficult. But it’s possible.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS WITH ILLNESS?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">As before, all the strategies and techniques you’ve learnt so far throughout this book, as well as your daily ten-minute practice, will help you cope with your illness. But I’d like to also offer some additional thoughts on how to cope specifically with illness, based on my many years’ experience working in physical and mental health settings.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 216. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_216" role="doc-pagebreak"/>But before I go any further, let me first say that some of these suggestions may suit you better than others, depending on your circumstances. Some might even make you feel angry if you don’t feel like they’re taking into account the unique challenges of your situation. I totally appreciate there can be nothing worse than someone offering advice if you feel they don’t understand your illness. I want to reiterate, however, that my sole aim here is to try to support you and bring some sense of ease. If one of the suggestions I’ve made makes even a little bit of sense, then I encourage you to go with it or at least consider it. Trust my experience and what the research reveals.</p>
<p class="indent_para">Here are my suggestions for what might help psychologically if you’re suffering from illness:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>The physical body experiences more pain and more symptoms when the mind is distressed. This leads to the mind becoming <i>more</i> distressed. It’s a vicious cycle. Focus on using techniques that quieten and relax both mind and body. They’ll be enormously beneficial.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>In times of illness, it’s essential that you make adjustments to your daily routine and endeavour to be flexible when things don’t go to plan. <span aria-label="page 217. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_217" role="doc-pagebreak"/>It isn’t possible to go on as normal. Trying to do so creates more distress.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Compliance with treatments and professional guidance is sometimes crucial.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Acceptance in times of illness comes with huge challenges. But the research within Acceptance and Commitment Therapy shows that accepting what the situation is rather than what it could be or what it should be can reduce your resistance to the fact of your illness, which has a knock-on beneficial impact overall. I know how difficult this can be in practice but try resisting less. Notice what happens.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Self-care must be a priority.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Hope can help. Although not easy, the research shows that opting for a hopeful perspective can improve how you feel. I want to be clear; this isn’t inconsistent with acceptance. You can both accept that you’re ill and still have hope. Hope means allowing yourself to see possibilities, even if it’s just one simple thing. For example, it could be that you are going to try to enjoy your garden, get outside a little more or do one activity every day that you know lifts your spirits. <span aria-label="page 218. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_218" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Your brain chemistry changes for the better when you allow yourself moments of hope.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Focus on self-soothing. When the going gets tough, dig deep for that compassionate voice that helps you find ease.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Practise mindfulness. The research is clear that daily mindfulness during times of illness can significantly improve symptoms. There is an abundance of material available online, in books and via in-person or online courses if you want to explore this further.</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">For any of you struggling now with illness, I send my thoughts and well wishes to you. May you find comfort in some of these words.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">CARERS</p>
<p class="noindent_para">Caring for someone who is ill, no matter how much you love them, can be exhausting. Not only are you watching someone suffer but, as a carer, you are performing numerous roles practically, physically, emotionally and psychologically, often with little support or recognition.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If you are caring for someone who is ill, I want to acknowledge the rollercoaster that this is for you. <span aria-label="page 219. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_219" role="doc-pagebreak"/>You are doing your best, but it never feels like it’s enough. You are tired but feel guilty when you need a rest. You want to be loving and kind but have moments when you are irritated. You want to be understanding but you are tired of listening. You want to be there all the time, but you desperately want a rest. You long for your life back.</p>
<p class="indent_para">If any of this resonates with you, I want to assure you I’ve heard this from so many other people who were or are in a similar situation to the one you find yourself in now. You are human, and caring comes with personal losses. There is nothing abnormal, unkind or worrying about any of these feelings. Unnecessary guilt may try to tell you that you must be on your ‘A game’ all the time. It simply isn’t possible. You are likely doing your very best and that is enough. If the person you are caring for was caring for you, they would likely be experiencing similar feelings.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We are all human. We get tired. We experience compassion fatigue. We struggle. But despite all of this we keep going and we turn up again the next day. That is the reality for most carers.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I’ll say it again because it bears repeating: you are doing your best.</p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 220. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_220" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS IF YOU’RE A CARER?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">I won’t be overly prescriptive here as each situation varies, but these are psychological strategies that have made the lives of carers I’ve worked with easier:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Take breaks and get help. As simple as this sounds, these are probably the most important suggestions I can make. Most carers believe they must do it all, all of the time. You don’t have to. There is help available if you seek it. The more rest you have, the more available you will be for your loved one.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Observe the role of guilt telling you that you are not doing enough or failing. Challenge this internal voice, and recognise that this is an unhelpful and false narrative rather than a fact.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Talk about your struggles with other carers. It will help you feel understood, and less isolated and alone. Talking to other carers about their own struggles will also help you to be more compassionate towards yourself, as you recognise your challenges in theirs.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Self-care must be prioritised above your caring role. If you burn out or become exhausted, <span aria-label="page 221. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_221" role="doc-pagebreak"/>then you won’t be able to help. This is not a selfish act. It’s an essential act to enable you to function.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Keep a journal. Sometimes it will be difficult for you to voice your frustrations or feelings out loud. Journalling every day will help you process and deal with what’s going on. Keep a therapeutic focus on thoughts, emotions and reactions.</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">DISAPPOINTMENT</p>
<p class="noindent_para">It’s a horrible feeling, disappointment. That sinking realisation in your gut that something hasn’t worked out as planned. It could be that you didn’t get the promotion you were promised, the new home you set your heart on has fallen through, you didn’t get the grades you needed, the relationship you thought would make it to the altar has ended, your IVF treatment has failed or you’ve discovered one of your children is dependent on drugs. It might not be one single event. Maybe life simply hasn’t worked out as you hoped it would. Disappointment is part of life. It shakes our foundations.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I hear about disappointment every day in my office. Sometimes my clients are furious and bitter. I’ve heard it all:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><span aria-label="page 222. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_222" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>‘I can’t believe this hasn’t worked out’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘This is just my luck’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘I’m doomed’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘Life isn’t fair’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘Why do good things never happen to me?’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘I don’t see the point in trying anymore’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>‘I should just give up’</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">I’m sure everyone at some stage has felt this way. Disappointment when life doesn’t go to plan activates a very strong personalised response. In other words, it becomes personal! The world is out to get you. This disappointment must be part of a master plan to push you to the ground. It seems you have been specifically targeted and screwed over by life.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I was recently on the London Underground and we got stuck in a tunnel for ten minutes because of a signal failure. The driver was apologetic and to be fair was providing regular updates. The woman seated beside me was on her way to see <i>Mamma Mia!</i> at the theatre with her friend, and they would now be fifteen minutes late and possibly refused entry. I know this because I was listening in on their conversation. She was incensed. How could this have happened? She proclaimed that not only was her evening ruined but the entire weekend was ruined. It got worse. She had lost £80 on tickets, <span aria-label="page 223. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_223" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and there was no way she would ever be coming back to London again. It was all a complete disaster. She was going to write to the London Underground and her MP to let them know what a ‘shambles’ the city’s train system was.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I must admit I was slightly tempted to intervene with a little dose of therapy but there was no need. Her friend remained very quiet and attentive during the rant but when it was finished, she spoke (and I paraphrase from memory):</p>
<p class="indent_para">‘Love, would you prefer the driver risk our safety so we can go and sing along to <i>Mamma Mia!</i>? Why don’t you try to calm down? Let’s find a nice bar, have a few cocktails and check out the hot guys in town. We can get cheap tickets for the matinee tomorrow and make the best of the evening.’</p>
<p class="indent_para">As soon as she’d finished speaking, the tube driver announced that the signal failure was sorted and we were about to get moving again. Disaster had been averted. Julia (yes, I even caught her name during my eavesdropping) <i>would</i> get to see <i>Mamma Mia!</i>. Her friend would have to wait until after the show to go to the bar and check out the hot guys.</p>
<p class="indent_para">This moment really stuck with me. Julia was clearly disappointed at the thought of missing the musical. She was immediately triggered, and her negative cognitive processes went into autopilot. I assume that she had patterns of feeling victimised, <span aria-label="page 224. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_224" role="doc-pagebreak"/>catastrophising, thinking the worst, not taking into account the positives and personalising life’s adversities. Observing her rant was like watching a landslide that just couldn’t be stopped. Life wasn’t delivering what she wanted and expected in that moment, and she refused to tolerate that. She was creating her own distress.</p>
<p class="indent_para">We all have our own <i>Mamma Mia!</i> moments. Some won’t be that serious, some will be incredibly disappointing. I don’t want to minimise the impact of disappointment. It’s healthy to feel and acknowledge disappointment. It’s never advisable to push away those feelings. But the problem is getting stuck or falling into the trap of being triggered unnecessarily.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS?</p>
<p class="noindent_para">You already have a host of tools available around managing thoughts, emotions and beliefs. When it comes to dealing specifically with disappointments, there are a few additional psychological tools that could come in handy:</p>
<ul class="bullet1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Become familiar with what disappointment feels like for you and how you normally respond. If you identify that you are easily triggered in certain situations, create space by allocating additional time during and after those situations (insofar as they can be anticipated) to allow your distress to settle.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Initiate perspective check-ins. <span aria-label="page 225. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_225" role="doc-pagebreak"/>How important is this? Are there other possibilities? Is there another way of looking at this?</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Trust the process. If you can’t control the outcome, allow yourself to let go of that expectation and just be.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Remain open to other possibilities. There is a very wise saying: ‘When one door closes, another opens.’</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Review your tolerance levels when life doesn’t deliver what you want or expect. Life doesn’t work the way we think it should. Life expects us to work <i>with</i> it. Hard to swallow but true.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>What can this teach you? I truly believe that we learn more from disappointments and setbacks than we do from successes, so long as we keep our minds open enough to hear those lessons. Salvage what you can from the circumstances rather than being paralysed by the disappointment. Many ‘successful’ people have allowed disappointment to teach them. It is a wise path to follow.</b></li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="page">
<div><span aria-label="page 226. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_226" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<p class="chap_h3">TIMES OF CRISIS</p>
<p class="noindent_para">What constitutes ‘a crisis’ can mean different things to different people. But I am going to define ‘crises’ as those times in life when your sense of stability and ability to cope are significantly compromised. This could be due to a life event, personal circumstances or feeling like you’ve ‘fallen off the wagon’. Put simply, normal everyday functioning is a real struggle. You might feel overwhelmingly out of control, hopeless, powerless and despairing. There may be times when you have suicidal ideation or intent. Remember, this doesn’t mean there is anything ‘wrong’ with you as a person. It simply means you are unwell. You are in crisis. This isn’t just a bad day or a rough patch. And you shouldn’t do this alone.</p>
<p class="indent_para">The problem with crisis periods is that a chain of events is set in motion that renders the situation almost impossible to manage (or at least, that’s how it feels). Emotional distress is probably highly elevated. Chemically, your brain is likely releasing a surge of stress-related hormones. Accessing rational responses becomes almost impossible. Day-to-day functioning is impaired. Communication becomes difficult. Relationships can feel challenging. It all generally feels like too much, leaving you feeling incredibly isolated.</p>
<p class="indent_para"><span aria-label="page 227. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_227" role="doc-pagebreak"/>This isn’t a time for therapy or working out patterns. This is a time for seeking help that enables you to return to a place of stability. You can work out what’s going on later in therapy.</p>
<p class="indent_para">I often see people in crisis directed to therapeutic services which, at that time, they are unable to engage with. This doesn’t mean therapy won’t eventually be helpful. It will. But just not yet. It’s like sending someone to sea without a life jacket.</p>
<p class="indent_para">There are several steps that will help you to do this, which I’ll explain now.</p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h3">WHAT HELPS?</p>
<ul class="bullet-1a" epub:type="daisy:unorderedlist">
<li class="bull1"><b>Acknowledge that you’re overwhelmed and ask for help. I know how hard this can be, but I promise you, when you speak to a professional, they will have seen this a thousand times before. They will understand you are in crisis and will be able to help you. I have provided a list of organisations at the end of this book.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Don’t be afraid to stop or pull back from normal everyday activities that are too much for you.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>This isn’t the time to try and work out what’s going on, or find practical or logistical solutions to commitments in your life. <span aria-label="page 228. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_228" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Hand this over to others temporarily, if you can. The priority now is getting the right help and support to get you back to a place of stability. I see too many people try to take this road alone. This is not a solo journey – trust me on this.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Share with a few trusted people close to you that you are in crisis and ask whether they can be your emergency contacts. This way they can carry out the unavoidable duties you’d normally be doing; they can bring food, help with household chores and childminding, let your workplace know you won’t be coming in, or just come over and listen, even if it’s the middle of the night.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b>Medication is sometimes suggested during these periods. In my experience professionally, short term, this can be incredibly helpful. Always discuss with a trained professional the best options for you.</b></li>
<li class="bull1"><b><i>Remember, crisis periods are temporary and they do end. You can get through this</i>.</b></li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent_para">When I meet a person in crisis, they often say they feel weak or ashamed that they have got to this point. I respond by reminding them that there is no reason to feel shame, <span aria-label="page 229. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_229" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and that they are the opposite of weak. The fact that they, and perhaps you if you’re in crisis right now, can carry on putting one foot in front of the other when you’re feeling the way you do demonstrates enormous courage and strength.</p>
<p class="indent_para">No one chooses to get to a point of crisis. Sometimes life is the real issue. There is no failure or shame in crisis. I see only bravery, humanity and a fellow human being who needs help to stand up again. <b>If you are struggling to cope, always seek professional help. You can get through this.</b></p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>