<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="daisy: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Useful Contact Information</title>
<link href="../styles/9780008378288_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8bdc2b07-98a1-4e2c-92c0-7ee4513426ea" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section>
<div><span aria-label="page 247. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_247" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<h1 class="bm_head" epub:type="title" id="inf"><a href="9780008378288_Contents.xhtml#r_inf"><b>Useful Contact Information</b></a></h1>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>MENTAL HEALTH HELPLINES</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts"><b>Whether you’re concerned about yourself or a loved one, these helplines and support groups can offer expert advice.</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Anxiety UK</b></p>
<p class="hang">Charity providing support if you have been diagnosed with an anxiety condition. Phone: 03444 775 774 (Monday to Friday, 9.30am to 5.30pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.anxietyuk.org.uk">www.anxietyuk.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><span aria-label="page 248. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_248" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Bipolar UK</b></p>
<p class="hang">A charity helping people living with manic depression or bipolar disorder.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.bipolaruk.org.uk">www.bipolaruk.org.uk</a></p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>CALM</b></p>
<p class="hang">CALM is the Campaign Against Living Miserably, for men aged 15 to 35.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0800 58 58 58 (daily, 5pm to midnight)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.thecalmzone.net">www.thecalmzone.net</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Men’s Health Forum</b></p>
<p class="hang">24/7 stress support for men by text, chat and email.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.menshealthforum.org.uk">www.menshealthforum.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Mental Health Foundation</b></p>
<p class="hang">Provides information and support for anyone with mental health problems or learning disabilities.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk">www.mentalhealth.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><span aria-label="page 249. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_249" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Mind</b></p>
<p class="hang">Promotes the views and needs of people with mental health problems.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0300 123 3393 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 6pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.mind.org.uk">www.mind.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>No Panic</b></p>
<p class="hang">Voluntary charity offering support for sufferers of panic attacks and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Offers a course to help overcome your phobia or OCD.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0844 967 4848 (daily, 10am to 10pm). Calls cost 5p per minute plus your phone provider’s access charge.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.nopanic.org.uk">www.nopanic.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>OCD Action</b></p>
<p class="hang">Support for people with OCD. Includes information on treatment and online resources.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0845 390 6232 (Monday to Friday, 9.30am to 5pm). Calls cost 5p per minute plus your phone provider’s access charge.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.ocdaction.org.uk">www.ocdaction.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><span aria-label="page 250. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_250" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>OCD UK</b></p>
<p class="hang">A charity run by people with OCD, for people with OCD. Includes facts, news and treatments</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0333 212 7890 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.ocduk.org">www.ocduk.org</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>PAPYRUS</b></p>
<p class="hang">Young suicide prevention society.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: HOPELINEUK 0800 068 4141 (Monday to Friday, 10am to 5pm and 7pm to 10pm, and 2pm to 5pm on weekends)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.papyrus-uk.org">www.papyrus-uk.org</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Rethink Mental Illness</b></p>
<p class="hang">Support and advice for people living with mental illness.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0300 5000 927 (Monday to Friday, 9.30am to 4pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.rethink.org">www.rethink.org</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><span aria-label="page 251. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_251" role="doc-pagebreak"/><b>Samaritans</b></p>
<p class="hang">Confidential support for people experiencing feelings of distress or despair.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 116 123 (free 24-hour helpline)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.samaritans.org">www.samaritans.org</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>SANE</b></p>
<p class="hang">Emotional support, information and guidance for people affected by mental illness, their families and carers.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: SANEline 0300 304 7000 (daily, 4.30pm to 10.30pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Textcare: comfort and care via text message, sent when the person needs it most: <a href="http://www.sane.org.uk">www.sane.org.uk</a>. Textcare support forum: <a href="http://www.sane.org.uk/supportforum">www.sane.org.uk/supportforum</a></p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.sane.org.uk/support">www.sane.org.uk/support</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>YoungMinds</b></p>
<p class="hang">Information on child and adolescent mental health. Services for parents and professionals. Phone: Parents’ helpline 0808 802 5544 (Monday to Friday, 9.30am to 4pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.youngminds.org.uk">www.youngminds.org.uk</a></p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 252. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_252" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>ABUSE (CHILD, SEXUAL, DOMESTIC VIOLENCE)</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>NSPCC</b></p>
<p class="hang">Children’s charity dedicated to ending child abuse and child cruelty.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0800 1111 for Childline for children (24-hour helpline) or 0808 800 5000 for adults concerned about a child (24-hour helpline)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.nspcc.org.uk">www.nspcc.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="chap_h2"><b>Refuge</b></p>
<p class="hang">Advice on dealing with domestic violence.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 2000 247 (24-hour helpline)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.refuge.org.uk">www.refuge.org.uk</a></p>
<div><span aria-label="page 253. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_253" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>ADDICTION (DRUGS, ALCOHOL, GAMBLING)</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Alcoholics Anonymous</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0800 917 7650 (24-hour helpline)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk">www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Narcotics Anonymous</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0300 999 1212 (daily, 10am to midnight)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.ukna.org">www.ukna.org</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>National Gambling Helpline</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 8020 133 (daily, 8am to midnight)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.begambleaware.org">www.begambleaware.org</a></p>
<div><span aria-label="page 254. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_254" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>ALZHEIMER’S</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Alzheimer’s Society</b></p>
<p class="hang">Provides information on dementia, including factsheets and helplines.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0300 222 1122 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, and 10am to 4pm on weekends)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.alzheimers.org.uk">www.alzheimers.org.uk</a></p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>BEREAVEMENT</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Cruse Bereavement Care</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 808 1677 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.cruse.org.uk">www.cruse.org.uk</a></p>
<div><span aria-label="page 255. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_255" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>CRIME VICTIMS</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Rape Crisis</b></p>
<p class="hang">To find your local services phone: 0808 802 9999 (daily, 12pm to 2.30pm and 7pm to 9.30pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.rapecrisis.org.uk">www.rapecrisis.org.uk</a></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Victim Support</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 168 9111 (24-hour helpline)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.victimsupport.org">www.victimsupport.org</a></p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>EATING DISORDERS</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Beat</b></p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 801 0677 (for adults) or 0808 801 0711 (for under-18s)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.b-eat.co.uk">www.b-eat.co.uk</a></p>
<div><span aria-label="page 256. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_256" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>LEARNING DISABILITIES</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Mencap</b></p>
<p class="hang">Charity working with people with a learning disability, their families and carers.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 808 1111 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.mencap.org.uk">www.mencap.org.uk</a></p>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>PARENTING</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Family Lives</b></p>
<p class="hang">Advice on all aspects of parenting, including dealing with bullying.</p>
<p class="hang">Phone: 0808 800 2222 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 9pm, and Saturday to Sunday, 10am to 3pm)</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.familylives.org.uk">www.familylives.org.uk</a></p>
<div><span aria-label="page 257. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_257" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</div>
<div class="page">
<p class="chap_h2"><b>RELATIONSHIPS</b></p>
<p class="noindent_para_ts2"><b>Relate</b></p>
<p class="hang">The UK’s largest provider of relationship support.</p>
<p class="hang">Website: <a href="http://www.relate.org.uk">www.relate.org.uk</a></p>
</div>
<div><span aria-label="page 258 is intentionally left as blank. " epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_258" role="doc-pagebreak"/></div>
</section>
</body>
</html>